The Computational Beauty of Nature
Gary William Flake




The Computational Beauty of Nature
Computer Explorations of Fractals, Chaos,
Complex Systems, and Adaptation




A Bradford Book
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England
c
⃝1998 Gary William Flake

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any elec-
tronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage
and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher.

This book was set by the author and printed and bound in the United States of America.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publishing Data
Flake, Gary William.
 The computational beauty of nature: computer explorations of fractals, chaos, complex
systems, and adaptation / Gary William Flake.
     p. cm.
     “A Bradford Book.”
     Includes bibliographical references and index.
     ISBN 0-262-06200-3 (hardcover: alk. paper)
     1. Electronic digital computers—Programming. 2. System analysis. I. Title.
QA76.6.F557 1998
003′ .3—dc21                                                                  97-52394
                                                                                 CIP
For my parents
Contents




           Preface    xiii
                     How to Read This Book xiv
                     Dealing with Diﬃcult Subjects   xv
                     Personal Motivation xvi
                     Acknowledgments xvi

           1 Introduction      1
             1.1  Simplicity and Complexity     2
             1.2  The Convergence of the Sciences         5
             1.3  The Silicon Laboratory     6



I   Computation        9

           2 Number Systems and Infinity      11
             2.1 Introduction to Number Properties            12
             2.2 Counting Numbers      14
             2.3 Rational Numbers     15
             2.4 Irrational Numbers    16
             2.5 Further Reading    22

           3 Computability and Incomputability       23
             3.1 Gödelization   25
             3.2 Models of Computation    26
             3.3 Lisp and Stutter    30
             3.4 Equivalence and Time Complexity    36
             3.5 Universal Computation and Decision Problems       40
             3.6 Incomputability    42
             3.7 Number Sets Revisited   45
             3.8 Further Reading    48
viii          Contents



              4 Postscript: Computation        51
                4.1  Gödel’s Incompleteness Result    52
                4.2  Incompleteness versus Incomputability   53
                4.3  Discrete versus Continuous     55
                4.4  Incomputability versus Computability    56
                4.5  Further Reading     57



 II    Fractals   59

              5 Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry      61
                5.1   The Cantor Set    62
                5.2   The Koch Curve      65
                5.3   The Peano Curve      66
                5.4   Fractional Dimensions     67
                5.5   Random Fractals in Nature and Brownian Motion   71
                5.6   Further Exploration     75
                5.7   Further Reading    76

              6 L-Systems and Fractal Growth        77
                6.1  Production Systems    78
                6.2  Turtle Graphics   80
                6.3  Further Exploration   81
                6.4  Further Reading    92

              7 Aﬃne Transformation Fractals      93
                7.1 A Review of Linear Algebra   94
                7.2 Composing Aﬃne Linear Operations    96
                7.3 The Multiple Reduction Copy Machine Algorithm     98
                7.4 Iterated Functional Systems 103
                7.5 Further Exploration 105
                7.6 Further Reading 106

              8 The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets 111
                8.1 Iterative Dynamical Systems 112
                8.2 Complex Numbers 112
                8.3 The Mandelbrot Set 114
                8.4 The M-Set and Computability 118
                8.5 The M-Set as the Master Julia Set 120
                8.6 Other Mysteries of the M-Set 125
                8.7 Further Exploration 125
ix            Contents



                 8.8     Further Reading   127

              9 Postscript: Fractals 129
                9.1  Algorithmic Regularity as Simplicity 130
                9.2  Stochastic Irregularity as Simplicity 132
                9.3  Eﬀective Complexity 134
                9.4  Further Reading 136



III   Chaos     137

              10 Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps 139
                 10.1 The Logistic Map 141
                 10.2 Stability and Instability 144
                 10.3 Bifurcations and Universality 148
                 10.4 Prediction, Layered Pastry, and Information Loss   150
                 10.5 The Shadowing Lemma 153
                 10.6 Characteristics of Chaos 154
                 10.7 Further Exploration 156
                 10.8 Further Reading 158

              11 Strange Attractors 159
                 11.1 The Hénon Attractor 160
                 11.2 A Brief Introduction to Calculus   165
                 11.3 The Lorenz Attractor 168
                 11.4 The Mackey-Glass System 173
                 11.5 Further Exploration 176
                 11.6 Further Reading 180

              12 Producer-Consumer Dynamics 181
                 12.1 Producer-Consumer Interactions 182
                 12.2 Predator-Prey Systems 183
                 12.3 Generalized Lotka-Volterra Systems 186
                 12.4 Individual-Based Ecology 187
                 12.5 Unifying Themes 197
                 12.6 Further Exploration 198
                 12.7 Further Reading 201

              13 Controlling Chaos 203
                 13.1 Taylor Expansions 204
                 13.2 Vector Calculus 205
                 13.3 Inner and Outer Vector Product     207
x         Contents



             13.4    Eigenvectors, Eigenvalues, and Basis   209
             13.5    OGY Control 211
             13.6    Controlling the Hénon Map 215
             13.7    Further Exploration 218
             13.8    Further Reading 219

          14 Postscript: Chaos 221
             14.1 Chaos and Randomness 222
             14.2 Randomness and Incomputability        224
             14.3 Incomputability and Chaos 226
             14.4 Further Reading 227



IV   Complex Systems         229

          15 Cellular Automata 231
             15.1 One-Dimensional CA 232
             15.2 Wolfram’s CA Classification 236
             15.3 Langton’s Lambda Parameter 242
             15.4 Conway’s Game of Life 245
             15.5 Natural CA-like Phenomena 251
             15.6 Further Exploration 255
             15.7 Further Reading 258

          16 Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization              261
             16.1 Termites 262
             16.2 Virtual Ants 264
             16.3 Flocks, Herds, and Schools 270
             16.4 Unifying Themes 275
             16.5 Further Exploration 276
             16.6 Further Reading 278

          17 Competition and Cooperation 281
             17.1 Game Theory and Zero-Sum Games 282
             17.2 Nonzero-Sum Games and Dilemmas 288
             17.3 Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma 293
             17.4 Stable Strategies and Other Considerations      295
             17.5 Ecological and Spatial Worlds 297
             17.6 Final Thoughts 303
             17.7 Further Exploration 303
             17.8 Further Reading 304
xi         Contents



           18 Natural and Analog Computation 307
              18.1 Artificial Neural Networks 309
              18.2 Associative Memory and Hebbian Learning 312
              18.3 Recalling Letters 316
              18.4 Hopfield Networks and Cost Optimization 318
              18.5 Unifying Themes 324
              18.6 Further Exploration 325
              18.7 Further Reading 326

           19 Postscript: Complex Systems 327
              19.1 Phase Transitions in Networks 328
              19.2 Phase Transitions in Computation 332
              19.3 Phase Transitions and Criticality 334
              19.4 Further Reading 336



V    Adaptation       337

           20 Genetics and Evolution 339
              20.1 Biological Adaptation 340
              20.2 Heredity as Motivation for Simulated Evolution      342
              20.3 Details of a Genetic Algorithm 343
              20.4 A Sampling of GA Encodings 348
              20.5 Schemata and Implicit Parallelism 353
              20.6 Other Evolutionary Inspirations 355
              20.7 Unifying Themes 356
              20.8 Further Exploration 358
              20.9 Further Reading 360

           21 Classifier Systems 361
              21.1 Feedback and Control 363
              21.2 Production, Expert, and Classifier Systems    364
              21.3 The Zeroth Level Classifier System 370
              21.4 Experiments with ZCS 373
              21.5 Further Exploration 379
              21.6 Further Reading 380

           22 Neural Networks and Learning 383
              22.1 Pattern Classification and the Perceptron    385
              22.2 Linear Inseparability 390
              22.3 Multilayer Perceptrons 392
xii         Contents



               22.4 Backpropagation 393
               22.5 Function Approximation 398
               22.6 Internal Representations 404
               22.7 Other Applications 409
               22.8 Unifying Themes 410
               22.9 Further Exploration 411
               22.10 Further Reading 413

            23 Postscript: Adaptation 415
               23.1 Models and Search Methods 416
               23.2 Search Methods and Environments 419
               23.3 Environments and Models 422
               23.4 Adaptation and Computation 423
               23.5 Further Reading 424



 Epilogue   425

            24 Duality and Dichotomy 427
               24.1 Web of Connections 428
               24.2 Interfaces to Hierarchies 429
               24.3 Limitations on Knowledge 431

            Source Code Notes        435

            Glossary     443

            Bibliography       469

            Index      483
Preface




            The scientist does not study nature because it is useful; he studies it because he delights
          in it, and he delights in it because it is beautiful. If nature were not beautiful, it would not
            be worth knowing, and if nature were not worth knowing, life would not be worth living.
          Of course I do not here speak of that beauty that strikes the senses, the beauty of qualities
           and appearances; not that I undervalue such beauty, far from it, but it has nothing to do
            with science; I mean that profounder beauty which comes from the harmonious order of
                                                     the parts, and which a pure intelligence can grasp.
                                                                                      — Henri Poincaré




          A variation on an old joke goes as follows:
                Engineers study interesting real-world problems but fudge their results.
                Mathematicians get exact results but study only toy problems. But
                computer scientists, being neither engineers nor mathematicians, study
                toy problems and fudge their results.
          Now, since I am a computer scientist, I have taken the liberty of altering the joke
          to make myself and my colleagues the butt of it. This joke examines a real problem
          found in all scientific disciplines. By substituting experimentalist, theorist, and
          simulationist for engineer, mathematician, and computer scientist, respectively, the
          joke becomes generalized for almost all of the sciences and gets to the heart of a
          very real division.
              A theorist will often make many simplifying assumptions in order to get to the
          essence of some physical process. Particles do not necessarily look like billiard balls,
          but it often helps to think in this way if you are trying to understand how classical
          mechanics says things should behave. Likewise, experimentalists often have to deal
          with messy processes that are prone to measurement error. So if a physicist finds
          that the surface temperature of an object is between 100,000 and 200,000 degrees, it
          doesn’t matter if the units are Celsius degrees or Kelvin degrees, because the margin
          of error is orders of magnitude larger than the diﬀerence in the two measuring units.
              A simulationist is a relatively new breed of scientist who attempts to understand
          how the world works by studying computer simulations of phenomena found in
xiv   Preface



      nature. A simulationist will always have to make some assumptions when building
      a computer model but will also find that the simulated results are not always a
      perfect match for what exists in the real world. Hence, the simulationist, having to
      incorporate principles from theory and experimental methodologies, straddles the
      fence and must deal with limiting factors found in both extreme approaches. But
      this is not always a bad thing.
          Consider an economist who builds a simplified model of the world economy, runs
      the model on a computer, and reaches the conclusion that interest rates, unemploy-
      ment, inflation, and growth will all reach a constant level at the end of the year
      and stay that way forever. For this one case, the simplified model tells us very little
      about how the real world works because the simplified model has failed to capture
      an important aspect of the real world. On the other hand, suppose that a simplified
      model is such that it never reaches equilibrium, turns out to be extremely sensitive
      to the starting conditions, and displays surprisingly complex behavior. Even if this
      model fails to make actual predictions about the real economy, it still has some
      predictive power since it may reveal a deeper truth about the inherent diﬃculty of
      predicting the economy or similar systems. In other words, the model is predictable
      in its unpredictability. Hence, if a simplified model can behave in a sophisticated
      manner, then it is not too great a leap to conclude that the real-world economy can
      display an even greater form of sophistication.
          For the first case, if after simplifying a natural process we find behavior that is
      profoundly simpler than the original phenomenon, then it is likely that the model
      failed to capture some essential piece of the real-world counterpart. On the other
      hand, if an analogous form of complexity is still found even in a simplified model,
      then it is highly possible that a key feature of the natural system has been isolated.
      This illustrates that simulations—especially if they are simplifications—can yield
      insight into how things work in the real world.
          All of this boils down to a simple but deep idea: simple recurrent rules can
      produce extremely rich and complicated behaviors. Pure theory often fails to make
      accurate predictions of complicated natural processes because the world does not
      always obey equations with analytical solutions. Similarly, experiments with com-
      plicated observations are often useless because they fail to bridge things from a re-
      verse direction and correlate complex eﬀects from simple causes. It is only through
      the marriage of theory and experimentation that many claims of the complexity
      of nature can withstand reasonable tests. Simulation, then, becomes a form of ex-
      perimentation in a universe of theories. The primary purpose of this book is to
      celebrate this fact.

      How to Read This Book
      While writing this book I had three diﬀerent goals in mind. Thus, I think that
      there are three diﬀerent ways that one can read this book.
xv   Preface



         On one level, most of the chapters stand on their own and can be appreciated in
     isolation from the others. I’ve spent the better part of ten years collecting interesting
     examples of computer simulations. If you are the sort of person who always wanted
     a crisp and simple description of how to make a fractal, chaotic system, cellular
     automaton, or neural network, then you may wish to skip around, dive right into
     the example programs, and play with the simulations that look appealing.
         The second way that you can read this book relates to how I learned about all
     of the diﬀerent topics covered in the chapters. While I am trained as a computer
     scientist, I spent several years working among physicists and other scientists. Thus,
     for better or worse, I’ve seen many of the covered topics approached in diﬀerent
     manners. In this context, I believe that there is a captivating and interdisciplinary
     connection between computation, fractals, chaos, complex systems, and adaptation.
     I’ve tried to explain each in terms of the others, so if you are interested in how one
     part of the book relates to the others, then a more sequential reading of the book
     may pay oﬀ for you.
         For the third way, I believe that there is an overall pattern that ties all of the
     part topics together into one coherent theme. This preface, the introduction, the
     five postscript chapters, and the epilogue are my attempt to thread everything in
     the book into one overall message.
         If this book is a forest, then the first way of reading it is akin to poking at
     individual trees. The second way is analogous to observing how nearby trees relate
     to each other. The third way would equate to standing back and taking in the whole
     forest at once. It doesn’t really matter which path you take in exploring these ideas,
     as I expect that most readers will stick to one path in preference to the others. But
     if you happen to try all three paths, you may be rewarded with a special type of
     understanding that not only relates each topic to the others but also each topic as
     it is viewed from diﬀerent perspectives.


     Dealing with Diﬃcult Subjects
     The topics covered in this book demand varying amounts of sophistication from
     you. Some of the ideas are so simple that they have formed the basis of lessons for
     a third grade class. Other chapters should give graduate students a headache. This
     is intentional. If you are confused by a sentence, section, or chapter, first see if the
     glossary at the end of the book helps; if it doesn’t, then by all means move on.
         Regarding mathematical equations, there are many ways of looking at them.
     If a picture is worth a thousand words (as well as a million pixels), then—as is
     shown later—an equation can be worth a billion pictures. An equation can often
     describe something so completely and compactly that any other type of description
     becomes cumbersome by comparison. Nevertheless, I have done my best to make
     every equation somewhat secondary to the supporting text.
xvi   Preface



         If a particular equation confuses you, the first thing you should do is see if the
      surrounding text gives you a little more insight into what the symbols mean. If
      that doesn’t work, then look to see if there is a picture that corresponds to the
      equation. Finally, if all else fails, you should do what I do when I don’t understand
      an equation: mentally substitute the sounds “blah blah blah” for the equation and
      keep going. You would be surprised how often this works.
         Don’t be discouraged if you don’t understand something. And please don’t write
      oﬀ a topic as being beyond your capabilities. If you are genuinely not interested in
      a diﬃcult section, so it goes. But if you are interested, it may happen that you will
      retroactively understand something, given enough time and eﬀort.


      Personal Motivation
      At the risk of being self-indulgent, I must admit that writing this book has been a
      selfish labor of love. Every writer is told at one time or another to pick a target
      reader and write for that one person. I wrote this book for the person I was around
      ten or fifteen years ago.
           I always wished for a book that combined all of these topics within one cover,
      gave suﬃcient information to enable one to duplicate all of the programs, and at
      the same time gave enough motivation to appreciate the more fundamental themes.
      I also wanted this hypothetical book to have parts that could be understood on a
      first reading, but additionally have sections that would be beyond my capabilities
      for years to come. This book could be sporadically opened at a random page or
      read sequentially. It would serve as a cookbook of computer recipes, be mostly
      self-contained, be a basic primer on some common mathematics, and also serve as
      a pointer to more fundamental texts.
           Whether or not the book you are holding lives up to the idealized version that
      I’ve had in my head is mostly a personal matter. My second most important goal for
      the book was for it to be a spark for those, like myself, who hack simply for the joy
      of hacking. Thus, while my idealized version of the book has been my “bullseye,”
      I’ll be happy just to hit the target on most counts since, in the end, the programs
      are the heart of the book.


      Acknowledgments
      Over the years many friends and colleagues have either directly or indirectly in-
      fluenced the outcome of this book. The only way who I can even come close to
      acknowledging all that deserve it is to start from the beginning of my academic
      career and work up to the present.
          When I was an undergrad at Clemson University, Ed Page and Gene Tagliarini
      brought me into their research group, gave me a slice of the funding pie, and in-
xvii   Preface



       troduced me to neural networks. During these years, Roy Pargas, Hal Grossman,
       Steve Stevenson, Steven Hedetneimi, and Eleanor Hare all had a hand in nudging
       me in the direction of graduate school and research. It’s a rare department that
       encourages undergrads to pursue research to the point of publication, and with-
       out this early exposure I am fairly certain that things would have turned out very
       diﬀerent for me.
           During the late 1980s, the Center for Nonlinear Studies at Los Alamos National
       Laboratory was a hotbed of research activity that attracted some of the most origi-
       nal thinkers in the world. Chris Barnes and Roger Jones not only acted as mentors
       but also managed to slip me through the back door at CNLS, which allowed me to
       work with a truly amazing group of people. I would also like to single out Peter
       Ford for inspiring me as a hacker. During this period Chris and Roger introduced
       me to Y.-C. Lee, then the Senior Scientist of CNLS, whom I would later follow to
       Maryland for graduate school.
           At the University of Maryland I was a graduate student in the Computer Science
       Department, a research assistant at the Institute for Advanced Computer Studies,
       and indirectly funded, along with Y.-C. Lee and his group, in the Laboratory for
       Plasma Research. I greatly benefited from working with H.-H. Chen, G.-Z. Sun,
       and the rest of the LPR group, which had a lot to do with honing my mathematical
       skills. Y.-C. served as a coadviser on my thesis along with Jim Reggia. The other
       members of my thesis committee, Bill Gasarch, Dianne O’Leary, and Laveen Kanal,
       all had a significant impact on my graduate studies.
           While at Siemens Corporate Research I have had the good fortune to work on
       exciting applications that directly relate to some of the topics in this book. I would
       like to thank Thomas Grandke, our CEO, and Wolf-Ekkehard Blanz, the former
       head of the Adaptive Information and Signal Processing Department, for creating
       a laboratory environment that maintains the delicate balance between research and
       development, and for allowing me to pursue external academic activities such as
       this book. SCR’s librarian extraordinare, Ruth Weitzenfeld, kindly helped me track
       down many of the references mentioned in this book, for which I am most grateful.
       I would also like to acknowledge my colleagues at SCR who have helped me to refine
       my thoughts on learning theory. I oﬀer a tip of the hat to Frans Coetzee, Chris
       Darken, Russell Greiner, Stephen Judd, Gary Kuhn, Mike Miller, Tom Petsche,
       Bharat Rao, Scott Rickard, Justinian Rosca, Iwan Santoso, Geoﬀ Towell, and Ray
       Watrous.
           I am extremely grateful to the friends, family, and colleagues who either have
       read preliminary portions of this book or have indirectly contributed to it through
       thoughtful discussions. While it is not possible to mention all of the people who have
       influenced this book, I would specifically like to thank Lynn, Marilyn and Stanford
       Apseloﬀ, David Bader, Bill Flake, Lee Giles, Sara Gottlieb, Stephen Hanson, Bill
       Horne, Barry Johnson, Gary Kuhn, Barak Pearlmutter, Bill Regli, Scott Rickard,
       Mark Rosenblum, Pat Vroom, Ray Watrous, and Tony Zador. Lee Giles initially
xviii   Preface



        tried to talk me out of writing this book, but his other good qualities more than
        make up for this. Special thanks go to Barak Pearlmutter, who went well beyond
        the call of duty by giving very detailed critiques of multiple drafts of this book. I
        am also grateful for all of the comments provided by the anonymous reviewers. It
        goes without saying that any remaining errors are all mine.
            Since this book forms a core for the type of course that I have always wanted
        to teach, I am grateful that several educators have given me a chance to try out
        some of the topics in this book on their students. In particular, Yannis Kevrekidis
        graciously allowed me to lecture to his students at Princeton University on discrete
        dynamical systems, and Laura Slattery and I built a set of lessons for her third
        grade class that demonstrated some of the principles of self-organization.
            Very special thanks go to Scott Rickard, who has easily been my most eager
        reader. He has read more versions of this book than anyone other than myself. I
        am deeply grateful for his comments—which often provided a much-needed sanity
        check on my writing—and for his encouragement.
            Harry Stanton of the MIT Press was a very early supporter of this book. His
        enthusiasm was so genuine and contagious that after talking with him, I couldn’t
        imagine going with any other publisher. Unfortunately, Harry did not live to see this
        book into print, but his influence on the final product is still substantial. Bob Prior
        and Deborah Cantor-Adams provided much critical assistance during the editorial
        and production stages. Beth Wilson carefully copyedited the manuscript. And the
        excellent production staﬀ of the MIT Press made the project as painless as possible
        by doing their jobs with the highest level of skill and professionalism. To all of
        them, I give my thanks.
            I have only the deepest thanks for my family. My parents, to whom this book
        is dedicated, and my brother and sister, Greg Flake and Vicki Merchel, have a long
        history of encouraging me to do crazy things, which has had a lot to do with giving
        me the endurance to work through this project to the end.
The Computational Beauty of Nature
1   Introduction




    The point of philosophy is to start with something so simple as not to seem worth stating,
                         and to end with something so paradoxical that no one will believe it.
                                                                          — Bertrand Russell


                                      Things should be as simple as possible, but not simpler.
                                                                           — Albert Einstein




    R    eductionism is the idea that a system can be understood by examining its
    individual parts. Implicit in this idea is that one may have to examine something
    at multiple levels, looking at the parts, then the parts of the parts, and so on. This
    is a natural way of attempting to understand the universe. Indeed, the hierarchy
    of science is recognizably organized in this manner. For example, take the so-called
    hard sciences. Biologists study living things at various levels ranging from the
    whole body, to organ systems, down to cellular structure. Beyond the cellular level
    lie chemical interactions and agents such as enzymes, which are organic chemical
    catalysts, and amino acids, which are building blocks for proteins. This is the
    domain of the chemist. To reduce things further, one would have to start looking
    into how atoms and molecules interact through chemical bonds that are dependent
    upon the number of electrons in the outermost electron shell of an atom. But
    what, exactly, are atoms? The physicist probes further into the nature of things by
    shattering atoms into their constituent parts, which brings us to protons, neutrons,
    and finally quarks. Ironically, at this level of understanding, scientists are dependent
    on mathematical techniques that often bear little resemblance to the reality that
    we are familiar with.
        To be sure, there is some overlap among scientific and mathematical fields that
    is exemplified by disciplines that use tools common to other areas (e.g., organic
    chemistry, biophysics, and quantum mathematics), but even these hybrid disciplines
    have well-defined niches. Reductionism is a powerful way of looking at the universe.
    But this begs a somewhat silly question: Since everything ultimately breaks down
    to the quantum level, why aren’t all scientists mathematicians at the core? In such a
2            Introduction



             world physicians would make diagnoses based on the patient’s bodily quarks, which
             makes about as much sense as building a house particle by particle. Nevertheless,
             every scientist must possess some knowledge of the level one step more fundamental
             than his or her specialty, but at some point reductionism must stop for science to
             be eﬀective.
                 Now, suppose that we wished to describe how the universe works. We could take
             a reductionist’s approach and catalog all of the diﬀerent types of objects that exist—
             perhaps starting with galaxy clusters, hitting terrestrial life forms about midway
             through, and then ending with subatomic particles—but would this approach really
             succeed in describing the universe? In making a large list of “things” it is easy to
             forget that the manner in which “things” work more often than not depends on the
             environment in which they exist. For example, we could describe the form of a duck
             in excruciating detail, but this gives us only half of the story. To really appreciate
             what a duck is, we should look at ducks in the air, in water, in the context of
             what they eat or what eats them, how they court, mate, and reproduce, the social
             structures they form, how they flock, and their need to migrate.
                 Looking back at the organization of the sciences, we find that at each level of un-
             derstanding, traditional scientists study two types of phenomena: agents (molecules,
             cells, ducks, and species) and interactions of agents (chemical reactions, immune
             system responses, duck mating, and evolution). Studying agents in isolation is a
             fruitful way of discovering insights into the form and function of an agent, but doing
             so has some known limitations. Specifically, reductionism fails when we try to use it
             in a reverse direction. As we shall see throughout this book, having a complete and
             perfect understanding of how an agent behaves in no way guarantees that you will
             be able to predict how this single agent will behave for all time or in the context of
             other agents.
                 We have, then, three diﬀerent ways of looking at how things work. We can take a
             purely reductionist approach and attempt to understand things through dissection.
             We also can take a wider view and attempt to understand whole collections at once
             by observing how many agents, say the neurons in a brain, form a global pattern,
             such as human intelligence. Or we can take an intermediate view and focus attention
             on the interactions of agents. Through this middle path, the interactions of agents
             can be seen to form the glue that binds one level of understanding to the next level.


1.1 Simplicity and Complexity
             Let’s take this idea further by examining a single ant. By itself, an ant’s behavior
             is not very mysterious. There is a very small number of tasks that any ant has to
             do in the course of its lifetime. Depending on its caste, an ant may forage for food,
             care for the queen’s brood, tend to the upkeep of the nest, defend against enemies of
             the nest, or, in the special case of the queen, lay eggs. Yet when we consider the ant
             colony as a whole, the behavior becomes much more complex. Army ant colonies
3   Introduction



    often consist of millions of workers that can sweep whole regions clean of animal life.
    The fungus-growing ants collect vegetable matter as food for symbiotic fungi and
    then harvest a portion of the fungi as food for the colony. The physical structures
    that ants build often contain thousands of passageways and appear mazelike to
    human eyes but are easily navigated by the inhabitants. The important thing to
    realize is that an ant colony is more than just a bunch of ants. Knowing how each
    caste in an ant species behaves, while interesting, would not enable a scientist to
    magically infer that ant colonies would possess so many sophisticated patterns of
    behavior.
        Instead of examining ants, we could have highlighted a number of interesting
    examples: economic markets that defy prediction, the pattern recognition capabil-
    ities of any of the vertebrates, the human immune system’s response to viral and
    bacterial attack, or the evolution of life on our planet. All of these examples are
    emergent in that they contain simple units that, when combined, form a more com-
    plex whole. This is a case of the whole of the system being greater than the sum of
    the parts, which is a fair definition of holism—the very opposite of reductionism.
        We also know that agents that exist on one level of understanding are very dif-
    ferent from agents on another level: cells are not organs, organs are not animals,
    and animals are not species. Yet surprisingly the interactions on one level of under-
    standing are often very similar to the interactions on other levels. How so? Consider
    the following:
       • Why do we find self-similar structure in biology, such as trees, ferns, leaves,
         and twigs? How does this relate to the self-similarity found in inanimate
         objects such as snowflakes, mountains, and clouds? Is there some way of gen-
         eralizing the notion of self-similarity to account for both types of phenomena?
       • Is there a common reason why it’s hard to predict the stock market and also
         hard to predict weather? Is unpredictability due to limited knowledge or is it
         somehow inherent in these systems?
       • How do collectives such as ant colonies, human brains, and economic markets
         self-organize to create enormously complex behavior that is much richer than
         the behavior of the individual component units?
       • What is the relationship between evolution, learning, and the adaptation
         found in social systems? Is adaptation unique to biological systems? What is
         the relationship between an adaptive system and its environment?
    The answers to all of these questions are apparently related to one simple fact:
    Nature is frugal. Of all the possible rules that could be used to govern the interac-
    tions among agents, scientists are finding that nature often uses the simplest. More
    than that, the same rules are repeatedly used in very diﬀerent places. To see why,
    consider the three attributes below that can be used to describe the interactions of
    agents.
4   Introduction



    Collections, Multiplicity, and Parallelism Complex systems with emergent
    properties are often highly parallel collections of similar units. Ant colonies owe
    much of their sophistication to the fact that they consist of many ants. This is
    obvious, but consider the implications. A parallel system is inherently more eﬃcient
    than a sequential system, since tasks can be performed simultaneously and more
    readily via specialization. Parallel systems that are redundant have fault tolerance.
    If some ants die, a task still has a good chance of being finished since similar ants
    can substitute for the missing ones. As an added bonus, subtle variation among
    the units of a parallel system allows for multiple problem solutions to be attempted
    simultaneously. For example, gazelles as a species actively seek a solution to the
    problem of avoiding lions. Some gazelles may be fast, others may be more wary and
    timid, while others may be more aggressive and protective of their young. A single
    gazelle cannot exploit all of the posed solutions to the problem of avoiding lions
    simultaneously, but the species as a whole can. The gazelle with the better solution
    stands a better chance of living to reproduce. In such a case, the species as a whole
    can be thought of as having found a better solution through natural selection.

    Iteration, Recursion, and Feedback For living things, iteration corresponds to
    reproduction. We can also expand our scope to include participants of an economic
    system, antibodies in an immune system, or reinforcement of synapses in the human
    brain. While parallelism involves multiplicity in a space, iteration involves a form
    of persistence in time. Similarly, recursion is responsible for the various types of
    self-similarity seen in nature. Almost all biological systems contain self-similar
    structures that are made through recurrent processes, while many physical systems
    contain a form of functional self-similarity that owes its richness to recursion. We
    will also see that systems are often recurrently coupled to their environment through
    feedback mechanisms. While animals must react according to their surroundings,
    they can also change this environment, which means that future actions by an
    animal will have to take these environmental changes into account.

    Adaptation, Learning, and Evolution Interesting systems can change and
    adapt. Adaptation can be viewed as a consequence of parallelism and iteration in
    a competitive environment with finite resources. In this case the combination of
    multiplicity and iteration acts as a sort of filter. We see this when life reproduces
    because it is fit, companies survive and spawn imitations because they make money,
    antibodies are copied because they fight infections, and synapses are reinforced
    because of their usefulness to the organism. With feedback mechanisms in place
    between an agent and an environment, adaptation can be seen as forming a loop in
    the cause and eﬀect of changes in both agents and environments.

       There are certainly many more ways to describe the interactions of agents; how-
    ever, multiplicity, iteration, and adaptation by themselves go a long way in describ-
5            Introduction



             ing what it is about interactions between agents that makes them so interesting.
             Moreover, multiplicity, iteration, and adaptation are universal concepts in that they
             are apparently important attributes for agents at all levels—from chemical reactants
             to biological ecosystems.
                 Looking back at our original goal of attempting to describe the universe, we
             find that there are a few generalizations that can be made regarding agents and
             interactions. Describing agents can be tedious, but for the most part it is a simple
             thing to do with the right tools. Describing interactions is usually far more diﬃcult
             and nebulous because we have to consider the entire environment in which the
             agents exist. The simplest type of question that we can ask about an interaction
             is what will X do next, in the presence of Y ? Notice that this question has a
             functional, algorithmic, or even computational feel to it, in that we are concerned
             not with “What is X?” but with “What will X do?” In this respect, describing
             an interaction is very similar to discovering nature’s “program” for something’s
             behavior. The goal of this book is to highlight the computational beauty found in
             nature’s programs.


1.2 The Convergence of the Sciences
             In a way, this book is also a story about scientific progress in the last part of the
             twentieth century. In the past, and even today, there is a worrisome fragmentation
             of the sciences. Specifically, scientists’ areas of expertise have become so special-
             ized that communication among scientists who are allegedly in the same field has
             become diﬃcult, if not impossible. For example, the computer sciences can be
             subdivided into a short list of subdisciplines: programming languages, operating
             systems, software engineering, database design, numerical analysis, hardware archi-
             tectures, theory of computation, and artificial intelligence. Most computer scientists
             can comfortably straddle two or three of the subdisciplines. However, each subdis-
             cipline can be further divided into even more specialized groups, and it is fair to
             say that a recursion theorist (a subset of theory of computation) will usually have
             little to talk about with a connectionist (a subset of artificial intelligence). To make
             things worse, computer science is a new science; that is, the situation is much worse
             in the older sciences, such as physics and biology.
                 Traditionally, there has also been a subdivision in most scientific disciplines
             between theorists and experimentalists. Again, some notable scientists (such as
             Henri Poincaré, quoted in the preface) have dabbled in both areas, but as a general
             rule most scientists could be safely classified in one of the two classes.
                 It is no coincidence that the recent renaissance in the sciences also marks the
             introduction and proliferation of computers. For the first time, computers have
             blurred the line between experimentation and theory. One of the first uses of com-
             puters was to simulate the evolution of complicated equations. Someone who creates
6            Introduction



             and uses a simulation is simultaneously engaging in theory and experimentation. As
             computers became more aﬀordable and easy to use, they became a general-purpose
             tool for all of the sciences. Thus, the line between experimentation and theory has
             been blurred for all of the disciplines wherever computer simulations provide some
             benefit.
                And just what sort of computer simulations have been built? Meteorologists
             build weather simulations. Physicists study the flow of plasma and the annealing
             of metals. Economists have modeled various types of economies. Psychologists
             have examined cognitive models of the brain. In all cases, scientists have found
             beauty and elegance in modeling systems that consist of simple, parallel, iterative,
             and/or adaptive elements. More important, scientists have been making discoveries
             that have been relevant to multiple fields. Thus, in many ways, the computer has
             reversed the trend toward fragmentation and has helped the sciences converge to a
             common point.


1.3 The Silicon Laboratory
             Where do we begin? This book is in five parts, with the first part acting as a general
             introduction to the theory of computation. The remaining four parts highlight
             what I believe are the four most interesting computational topics today: fractals,
             chaos, complex systems, and adaptation. Each topic has had popular and technical
             books devoted to it alone. Some few books deal with two or three of the topics. I
             hope to convince you that the combination of the five parts is far more interesting
             taken together than alone. Figure 1.1 illustrates this point further by showing an
             association map of the book parts. The line segment between any two parts is
             labeled by a topic that straddles both of the joined parts. Many of the labels in the
             figure may be unfamiliar to you at this point, but we will eventually see how these
             topics not only are casually related because of the computational aspect of each
             but also intricately bounded together into a powerful metaphor for understanding
             nature’s more beautiful phenomena.
                 An overview of the book’s contents follows. Each part is relatively self-contained
             and can be appreciated on its own. However, this book is also designed so that each
             part acts as a rough introduction to the next part.

             Computation What are the limits of computers and what does it mean to com-
             pute? We will examine this question with a bottom-up approach, starting with the
             properties of diﬀerent types of numbers and sets. The key point of the first part of
             this book is that the theory of computation yields a surprisingly simple definition
             of what it means to compute. We will punctuate this fact by showing how one
             can construct higher mathematical functions with only a very small set of primitive
             computational functions as a starting place.
7   Introduction



                                                               Computation


                                                         ion              In co
                                                                                                   Re
                                                      tat                                            cu
                                                                                                        rsi
                                                d ap                                                       on
                                           C oa                            m pu
                                                                             tab il
                                                                                  ity

                                      Hierarchical Models
          Adaptation                                                                                                                     Fractals
                                                                                                                         els
                                                                                                                      od
                                                                                                                     M
                                                                                                                th
                                                                                                              ow
                                                                                                          Gr

                                                                                                                                  tors
                                  n
                             Orga                                                                                            ge A
                       Self-                   ar A                                                                              ttrac
                                                   utom
                              izati
                                 on                    ata                                                               Stran
                                                                                  Em
                                            Cell                                        erg
                                                 ul                                        en
                                                                                              ce




                                                               Phase Transitions
                   Complex Systems                                                                             Chaos



                   Figure 1.1             An association map of the contents of this book



       However, even though the notion of computability is easy to define, it turns out
    that the process of computation can be extremely rich, complex, and full of pitfalls.
    We will examine what it means for a function to be incomputable and also see that
    there are more incomputable functions than computable functions.


    Fractals In Part II, we will study various types of fractals, which are beautiful
    images that can be eﬃciently produced by iterating equations. Since fractals can
    be computationally described, it is interesting to see that they are often found in
    natural systems, such as in the way trees and ferns grow or in the branching of
    bronchial tubes in human lungs. Curiously, the last type of fractal that we will
    examine in Part II has the same sort of pathological quality that the incomputable
    programs in Part I have.


    Chaos In Part III, we will examine a special type of fractal, known as a strange
    attractor, that is often associated with chaos. Chaos makes the future behavior
8   Introduction



    of deterministic systems such as the weather, economies, and biological systems
    impossible to predict in the long term but predictable in the short term. Chaos
    can be found when nonlinear systems are iterated repeatedly but is also found in
    multi-agent complex systems such as ecosystems, economies, and social structures.
    Ironically, the inherent sensitivity of chaotic systems can make them easier to control
    than one would think, since their sensitivity can be used to make large changes with
    only small control forces.

    Complex Systems In Part IV, we will study complex systems consisting of many
    very simple units that interact. The amount of interaction among agents partially
    determines the overall behavior of the whole system. On one extreme, systems with
    little interaction fall into static patterns, while on the other extreme, overactive
    systems boil with chaos. Between the two extremes is a region of criticality in which
    some very interesting things happen. A special type of cellular automata known as
    the Game of Life, which is in the critical region, is able to produce self-replicating
    systems and roving creatures, but it is also capable of universal computation. We
    will also study the Iterative Prisoners’ Dilemma, which may explain why cooperation
    in nature is more common than one would expect. Afterward, competition and
    cooperation among agents will be highlighted as a natural method of problem-
    solving in nature. We will see how an artificial neural network with fixed synapses
    can solve interesting problems seemingly non-algorithmically.

    Adaptation Finally, in Part V, we will allow our complex systems to change,
    adapt, learn, and evolve. The focus of these chapters will include evolutionary
    systems, classifier systems, and artificial neural networks. Genetic algorithms will
    be used to evolve solutions to a wide variety of problems. We will also see how a
    simple form of feedback coupled with evolutionary mechanisms can be used to mimic
    a form of intelligence in classifier systems. We will then examine how artificial neural
    networks can be trained by example to solve pattern classification and function
    approximation problems. At the end of this part, we will see how in many ways
    one can view learning, evolution, and cultural adaptation as one process occurring
    on varying time scales.

        Throughout this book we will talk about physics, biology, economics, evolution,
    and a host of other topics, but the prevailing theme will be to use the computer as
    a laboratory and a metaphor for understanding the universe.
I   Computation


    Any discrete piece of information can be represented by a set of numbers. Systems
    that compute can represent powerful mappings from one set of numbers to another.
    Moreover, any program on any computer is equivalent to a number mapping. These
    mappings can be thought of as statements about the properties of numbers; hence,
    there is a close connection between computer programs and mathematical proofs.
    But there are more possible mappings than possible programs; thus, there are some
    things that simply cannot be computed. The actual process of computing can be
    defined in terms of a very small number of primitive operations, with recursion
    and/or iteration comprising the most fundamental pieces of a computing device.
    Computing devices can also make statements about other computing devices. This
    leads to a fundamental paradox that ultimately exposes the limitations not just of
    of machine logic, but all of nature as well.
       Chapter 2 introduces some important properties of diﬀerent types of numbers,
    sets, and infinities. Chapter 3 expands on this by introducing the concepts behind
    computation and shows how computation can be seen to operate over sets of inte-
    gers. Chapter 4 ties together some of the paradoxes seen in the earlier chapters to
    show how they are applicable to all of mathematics.
2   Number Systems and Infinity




            It is strange that we know so little about the properties of numbers. They are our
          handiwork, yet they baﬄe us; we can fathom only a few of their intricacies. Having
     defined their attributes and prescribed their behavior, we are hard pressed to perceive the
                                                                  implications of our formulas.
                                                                          — James R. Newman

     Our minds are finite, and yet even in these circumstances of finitude we are surrounded
    by possibilities that are infinite, and the purpose of human life is to grasp as much as we
                                                                       can out of the infinitude.
                                                                    — Alfred North Whitehead



    T    here are two complementary images that we should consider before starting
    this chapter. The first is how a painter or sculptor modifies a medium to create
    original structure from what was without form. The second is how sound waves
    propagate through a medium to travel from one point to another. Both images
    serve as metaphors for the motivation behind this and the next chapter. As for the
    first image, just as a painter adds pigment to canvas and a sculptor bends and molds
    clay, so a programmer twiddles bits within silicon. The second image relates to the
    way information within a computer is subject to the constraints of the environment
    in which it exists, namely, the computer itself.
        The key word in both metaphors is “medium,” yet there is a subtle diﬀerence
    in each use of the word. When a human programs a computer, quite often the
    underlying design of the program represents a mathematical process that is often
    creative and beautiful in its own right. The fact that good programs are logical by
    necessity does not diminish the beauty at all. In fact, the acts of blending colors,
    composing a fugue, and chiseling stone are all subject to their own logical rules, but
    since the result of these actions seems far removed from logic, it is easy to forget
    that the rules are really in place. Nevertheless, I would like you to consider the
    computer as a medium of expression just as you would canvas or clay.
        As for the second metaphor, everything that is dynamic exists and changes
    in accordance with the environment in which it exists. The interactions among
12           Number Systems and Infinity



             objects and environments are also governed by a well-defined set of rules. Similarly,
             programs executing inside of a computer are by definition following a logical path;
             thus one could think of a computer as a medium in which programs flow just as
             sound travels through matter.
                 There is also a sort of yin-yang duality in this idea that I find pleasing. One of
             the first items covered in an introductory physics course is the diﬀerence between
             potential and kinetic energy. You can think of potential energy as the energy stored
             in, say, a battery or a rock placed on top of a hill. Kinetic energy is energy that is
             in the process of being converted, as when the stored electricity in a battery drives
             a motor and when a rock rolls down a hill. Similarly, when a human designs a
             program, there exists a potential computation that is unleashed when the program
             executes within a computer. Thus, one can think of the computation as being
             kinetic and in motion. Moreover, just as a child with a firecracker can be surprised
             by the diﬀerence between potential and kinetic energy, so computer programmers
             are often surprised (even pleasantly) by the diﬀerence between potential and kinetic
             computation.
                 Now that we’ve agreed to look at the computer as a medium, and since this book
             is really about looking at the universe in terms of processes familiar to computer
             scientists, the next two chapters are devoted exclusively to the properties of numbers
             and computers.


2.1 Introduction to Number Properties
             Sometime around the fifth century B.C., the Greek philosopher Zeno posed a para-
             dox that now bears his name. Suppose that Achilles and a tortoise are to run a
             footrace. Let’s assume that Achilles is exactly twice as fast as the tortoise. (Our
             tortoise is obviously a veritable Hercules among his kind.) To make things fair, the
             tortoise will get a head start of 1000 meters. After the start of the race, by the
             time Achilles runs 1000 meters, the tortoise is still ahead by 500 meters. However,
             Achilles is a far superior athlete, so he easily covers the next 500 meters. During
             this time, the tortoise has managed to go another 250 meters. We can repeat the
             process for an infinite number of time slices while always finding the tortoise just a
             bit ahead of Achilles. Will Achilles ever catch up to the tortoise?
                 Clearly, we know that something is amiss with the story, as common sense tells
             us that the world doesn’t work this way and that there exists some distance in
             which Achilles should be able to overcome the tortoise and pass it. But what is
             that distance and how long does it take Achilles to finally reach the tortoise? There
             is an algebraic solution to the problem, but this doesn’t directly address the paradox
             of Achilles always being somewhat behind the tortoise when we break the race up
             into small time slices.
13   Number Systems and Infinity



                                                              1
                                                                    ···
                                                              32        1
                                                      1                 64
                                                      8
                                                                   1
                                                                   16
                                         1
                                         2


                                                          1
                                                          4




                    Figure 2.1     An infinite summation captured in a square



         Let’s add a little more information to the story and concentrate on the question
     of how long it will take Achilles to catch up to the tortoise. First, let’s assume that
     Achilles can run 1000 meters in exactly one minute. After one minute, Achilles has
     traveled 1000 meters while the tortoise has covered 500. When Achilles travels the
     next 500 meters (and the tortoise another 250), one-half of a minute has passed.
     Similarly, each “time slice” that we are looking at will be exactly half the previous
     time.
         Recall that it was earlier stated that we could look at an infinite number of time
     slices and always come to the conclusion that the tortoise was always slightly ahead
     of Achilles. However, just because there is an infinite number of time slices, it does
     not necessarily mean that the sum of all of the time slices (the total elapsed time)
     is also infinite. More specifically, what is the sum total of 1 + 12 + 14 + 18 + · · ·?
         Forget for the moment that the 1 appears in the sum and just concentrate on
     the fractions. Another way of writing this is:
                                   ∞
                                   ! 1            1 1 1
                                              =    + + + ···.
                                   i=1
                                         2i       2 4 8

     At any step in the infinite sum we can represent the current running total by the
     area of a divided box whose total area is 1. At each step, we divide the empty
     portion of the box in half, mark one side as used and leave the other half for the
     next step. As Figure 2.1 illustrates, if we continue the process for an infinite number
     of steps, we will eventually fill the box. Therefore, the sum total of all of the infinite
     time slices is really equal to two minutes (1 + 1 = one minute for the infinite sum
     and the other minute that we originally ignored). Moreover, since we know that
     Achilles can run exactly 1000 meters a minute, we can conclude that Achilles and
14          Number Systems and Infinity



            the tortoise will be tied if the track is 2000 meters in length. If the track is any
            length greater than 2000 meters, Achilles will win the race; any less, and Achilles
            will lose.
                Zeno’s paradox illustrates just one of the interesting aspects of numbers and
            infinity that will be highlighted in this chapter. To solve the paradox, we were
            required to examine the properties of an infinite summation of fractions (or rational
            numbers). In the remainder of this chapter, we will look at counting numbers, the
            rational numbers in more detail, and irrational numbers.


2.2 Counting Numbers
            Consider the set of natural numbers: 1, 2, 3, . . .. We know that there is an infinite
            number of natural numbers. We can say the same thing about all of the even natural
            numbers. But are there more numbers than even numbers? Surprisingly, the size of
            the two sets is identical. The reason is that for every member in the set of natural
            numbers, there is a corresponding member in the set of even numbers. For example,
            we could construct what is known as a one-to-one mapping:

                                          1 2   3   4 5 6
                                          ↕ ↕   ↕   ↕ ↕ ↕ ··· .
                                          2 4   6   8 10 12

               What about more complex sets, such as the set of all perfect cubes? Before
            answering this question, let’s examine the first five perfect cubes in the context of
            the other natural numbers:

                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
                   27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49
                  50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72
                  73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95
                  96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113
                  114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 · · ·.

               Since the space between successive perfect cubes grows dramatically and perfect
            cubes become less common as we move down the list, you may think that there
            are far more natural numbers than perfect cubes. This is wrong. There are two
            reasons why the number of perfect cubes is equal to the number of natural numbers.
            First, the function to produce perfect cubes is invertible. If I tell you that I am
            looking at perfect cubes and you give me an example, say 2197, with some eﬀort I
            can respond by saying that your number is the thirteenth perfect cube. Also, this
            function yields a one-to-one mapping between its argument and its result, just like
15          Number Systems and Infinity



            the mapping from natural numbers to even numbers. A more general picture of a
            one-to-one mapping looks like:

                                      1    2           3    4       5    6
                                      ↕    ↕           ↕    ↕       ↕    ↕            ···,
                                    f(1) f(2)        f(3) f(4)    f(5) f(6)

            where f (x) is our mapping function. Depending on the circumstances, instead of
            talking about the natural numbers {1, 2, 3, . . .} it may be more appropriate for us
            to talk about integers {. . . , −1, 0, 1, . . .} or the positive integers {0, 1, 2, . . .}. It
            really doesn’t matter which of these sets we are using, because all of them have
            same number of elements; that is, they all contain a countably infinite number of
            elements.


2.3 Rational Numbers
            A rational number (or fraction) is a number that can be represented as the ratio of
            two natural numbers, such as a/b, with the understanding that the denominator, b,
            is never zero. One limiting aspect of the natural numbers is that for any two natural
            numbers, there is only a finite number of natural numbers between them. This is
            not so for the rational numbers. To convince yourself of this, you only need to take
            the average of any two diﬀerent rational numbers. For example, given a1 /b1 and
            a2 /b2 , we can compute the arithmetical mean or average as (a1 b2 + a2 b1 )/(2b1 b2 ).
            Call this average a3 /b3 . We can repeat the process as long as we like by taking the
            average of a1 /b1 and a3 /b3 , then a1 /b1 and a4 /b4 , and so on.
                Notice that there is no such thing as the smallest nonzero rational number,
            which implies that we simply cannot enumerate all of them by size. However, we
            can construct a simple procedure to enumerate all of the rationals based on another
            method. To do this, we will consider only rational numbers between 0 and 1 at
            first (excluding 0 and including 1), which implies that a ≤ b. We can construct a
            triangular matrix that contains all of the rationals between 0 and 1 by having one
            row per denominator. In row b, there are exactly b columns, one for each value of
            a with a ≤ b. The first few entries of the table look like this:
                                           1
                                           1
                                           1    2
                                           2    2
                                           1    2       3
                                           3    3       3
                                           1    2       3    4                    .
                                           4    4       4    4
                                           1    2       3    4      5
                                           5    5       5    5      5
                                           ..   ..      ..   ..     ..   ..
                                            .    .       .    .      .        .
16           Number Systems and Infinity



             The boxed fractions are repeats and can be removed from the table so that all
             entries represent unique rational numbers. Now, if we read the table left-to-right
             and top-down (as one would read a book), all of the fractions between 0 and 1 will
             eventually be encountered. Thus, we could map each fraction between 0 and 1 to
             an odd natural number:
                                 1   3   5   7   9   11 13 15 17 19
                                 ↕   ↕   ↕   ↕   ↕   ↕ ↕ ↕ ↕ ↕ ··· .
                                 1   1   1   2   1   3    1   2    3    4
                                 1   2   3   3   4   4    5   5    5    5

                For rational numbers greater than 1, we know that a > b. By taking the recip-
             rocal of such a fraction, b/a, we are left with a number that is strictly greater than
             0 and less than 1. Therefore, by the same process that allowed us to map the small
             fractions to the odd numbers, we can map the large fractions to the even numbers.
                This leads us to a startling conclusion: There are as many natural numbers as
             fractions! The most important point about our construction is that it is one-to-one
             and invertible. Specifically, if you wanted to play devil’s advocate and claim that
             the mapping failed, you would have to produce two rational numbers that mapped
             to the same natural number or one rational number that mapped to no natural
             number. Based on our method of construction, we are guaranteed that this will
             never happen.


2.4 Irrational Numbers
             Fractions are known as rational numbers because they can be expressed √         as the
             ratio of two natural numbers. Irrational numbers, such as π and 2, are numbers
             that cannot be represented as the ratio of two natural numbers. If we represent
             a number by its decimal expansion, we find that rational numbers have a finite
             or a periodic decimal expansion, while irrational numbers have an infinite decimal
             expansion that has no pattern. For example, the rational number 31 has the decimal
             expansion 0.3̄, where the bar over the last digit signifies that the expansion repeats
             forever. Moreover, there are numbers such as 0.123456789 that are also rational
             because the last four digits repeat. Whenever a number’s decimal expansion falls
             into a pattern, it is always possible to convert the decimal expansion into a fraction.
                 Taking the analysis one step further, rational numbers can also be represented
                                                                 1     2      3
             as a summation of fractions, such as 0.123 = 10       + 100  + 1000 . What about the
             repeating fractions? It turns out that the repeating fractions require an infinite
             summation, but this is not a problem for us because the infinite series converges to
             a rational number. We saw this when we solved Zeno’s paradox and computed that
             the footrace between Achilles and the tortoise would be tied two minutes into the
             race.
                 Infinite series of this type reveal a quirky aspect of rational numbers. Specifi-
             cally, for any rational number we can construct multiple decimal expansions that
17   Number Systems and Infinity



      Is the Square Root of 2 Really Irrational?                            Digression 2.1
                                 √
       Here is a great proof that 2 is irrational. It was first discovered by Pythagoras around
       the fifth century B.C. The√technique is called a proof by contradiction and starts oﬀ
       with the assumption that 2 is actually rational. By    √ making this assumption, we will
       be faced with an impossibility, which implies that 2 is in fact irrational.
               √
       Now if 2 is rational, then it is equal to some fraction, a/b. Let’s take the square of
       the fraction that we know is equal to 2. We now have the equality a2 /b2 = 2. Multiply
       each side by b2 to get a2 = 2b2 . Here comes the tricky part: We are going to take
       advantage of the fact that every natural number has a unique prime factorization.
       Taking the prime factorization of a and b, we know that the prime factorization of a2
       must have twice as many 2s as the factorization for a. The same thing applies to b2
       and b. Therefore, the prime factorizations of a2 and b2 must have an even number of
       2s.

       Now, looking at the equation a2 = 2b2 , we know that the left side has an even number
       of 2s while the right side has an odd number of 2s. One side will have more than
       the other. We don’t know which side, but we don’t care. If we take the product of
       the smaller number of 2s and divide each side of a2 = 2b2 by that number, then one
       side will have at least one 2 in it, while the other will have none. Since 2 is the only
       even prime number and an odd number multiplied by an odd number always yields
       an odd result, we know that the side with the 2s must be an even number while the    √
       side with no 2 is an odd number. A contradiction! Therefore, it is impossible for 2
       to be expressed as a fraction.




     are clearly diﬀerent but are numerically equivalent. As an example consider the
     equivalence of 1 = 0.9̄. It may seem counterintuitive to state that 1 and 0.9̄ are
                                             9     9      9
     equal, but in fact they are because 10    + 100  + 1000 + · · · = 1. This is not some
     subtle flaw in the properties of numbers, but an artifact of the diﬀerent ways we
     can represent them.
         Another way to represent a number is as a point on a number line. We are all
     familiar with the process of labeling a number line and placing a point on it to
     represent a particular value. This is easy enough for natural numbers and rationals,
     but where would you put a point on a number line for an irrational number?√ For
     example, suppose we want to put a point   √ on a number line for the value of 2 =
     1.41421356 · · ·. We could approximate 2 with √     three digits and place a point at
     1.41 on the number line. However, we know that 2 is really a little bit to the right
     of 1.41, so we go one step further and put another point at 1.414. Once again our
     estimate is a bit short of the true location. It would seem that we could continue
     the process indefinitely, always failing to put a point on the correct location.
18   Number Systems and Infinity




                                                      1




                                 -1               0                       2
                 Figure 2.2    Isolating the square root of two on the number line



               √
         Does 2 really have a true √ location on the number line and can we find it? Our
     problem seems to be that 2 is always to the right of our best estimate, but we
     could approach the problem from another side, literally.     √ Instead of using 1.41 as a
     first guess, we can use 1.42, which √ is  just  larger than     2. At the next step we use
     1.415,
     √       and  so on. Now   we   have  2   trapped.    In  fact, the  infinite sequence of the
        2 converges to a real location on the number line, just like the infinite series in
     Zeno’s paradox. By approaching that point√from each side, we can see that it can
     be isolated. Another method for isolating 2 is best illustrated with the diagram
     in Figure 2.2.
         In Figure 2.2, I have constructed a triangle with two sides      √ equal to 1 in length.
     We know that the  √  third  side must  have    a  length  equal  to    1 + 1. Now take √ the
     arrow of length 2 and swing it around to the x-axis. Voila! We have found 2.
         Up to this point, we found that natural numbers, integers, and fractions all
     contain the same infinite number of elements. Is there the same number of irrational
     numbers as well? Let’s assume for the moment that there are. We will attempt to
     construct a one-to-one mapping, just as before, between the natural numbers and
     the irrational numbers to see what will happen. Below is a table with a natural
     number on the left side and some corresponding irrational number on the right
     side. Unfortunately, we cannot write out the full decimal expansion of the irrational
     numbers in the table, but this does not matter for our purposes. Moreover, instead
     of writing digits for the irrational numbers, we will use the notation xij to signify
     the jth digit of the irrational number that maps to i, and to keep things simple, we
     will worry only about irrational numbers between 0 and 1 so that each digit is to
     the right of the decimal point, as in 0.xi1 xi2 xi3 · · ·.
19   Number Systems and Infinity



                      1    ↔    x11     x12     x13      x14    x15    ···
                      2    ↔    x21     x22     x23      x24    x25    ···
                      3    ↔    x31     x32     x33      x34    x35    ···
                      4    ↔    x41     x42     x43      x44    x45    ···
                      5    ↔    x51     x52     x53      x54    x55    ···
                      ..         ..      ..      ..       ..     ..    ..
                       .          .       .       .        .      .       .

         Boxes have been placed around the diagonal elements to highlight them. Now
     the important question is: Does this mapping work? Remarkably the mapping fails,
     but this is not a failure for us because we have found a deeper truth concerning the
     nature of irrational numbers. To see that the mapping fails, we must first agree that
     for it to work, there must be a place in the table for all of the irrational numbers.
     This seems reasonable, but consider an irrational number that is constructed as a
     sequence of digits that diﬀer from the diagonal entries. If we represent this new
     number in the same way as the irrational numbers in our table, it will look like:

                Not x11     Not x22     Not x33       Not x44   Not x55       ··· .

     If we try to find a place in our table for this irrational number, we are faced with
     the inevitable conclusion that our new number cannot exist in the table because it
     will always diﬀer from each entry in the table by at least one digit. Specifically, if
     we assume it belongs in the table at, say, line 835, then by virtue of the way we
     constructed the number, the 835th digit must diﬀer from the real entry at line 835.
         We have just proved that the infinity of the irrational numbers is greater than
     the infinity of the natural numbers. In doing so, we followed in the footsteps of the
     great German mathematician Georg Cantor, who invented set theory and was the
     first to prove that not all infinities are equal. Since the size of the natural numbers
     is countably infinite, the size of all of the real numbers is properly referred to as
     uncountably infinite.
         The next property of numbers that we will examine in this chapter concerns
     the density of the real number line. Let’s start by considering only a mapping
     between the positive real numbers into a segment between 0 and 1. Including the
     negative real numbers or using a diﬀerent segment is just as easy, but the examples
     will be clearer if we use this restriction. It turns out that any segment of finite
     length on the real number line is infinitely dense, in that you can squeeze all of
     the real numbers into it. As before, this is accomplished with a mapping function
     with a few special properties. The first property of our function is that it must
     be monotonically increasing. A monotone function is one that strictly increases or
     decreases but never both. This is a formal way of saying that the mapping function
     has no “humps.” Readers familiar with calculus will recognize this property as a
     way of saying that the first derivative of a function is never 0. Further specifying
     that the function is increasing means that for any two arguments, a and b, if a > b,
20       Number Systems and Infinity




     (0, 1)                                                                  8




                      Figure 2.3    Mapping real numbers into a circle or a segment



         then for the mapping function, f (x), f (a) > f (b). The second property is that the
         mapping function must asymptotically approach a constant value as the function
         argument approaches infinity. This means that if we increase the function argument,
         the function result will get larger, but each further increase will increase the function
         result by only a little bit more each time. The function result will get infinitely close
         to a constant value of our choice but never quite reach it. This is very similar in
         spirit to how an infinite series converges to a constant value.
             Figure 2.3 demonstrates two mapping functions that meet our requirements. To
         see how they work, consider a vector starting at the coordinate (0, 1) and ending
         at some value on the number line. The number at the end of the vector is the one
         that we want to map into another value between 0 and 1. As the vector travels to
         its destination, it always passes through a fixed location on the unit circle centered
         at (0, 1). We can put a mark on the circle where the vector passes through. Notice
         that no matter how large the vector is, it will always hit somewhere in the bottom
         right quarter of the circle. Therefore, the x-coordinate of the marked points will
         always be between 0 and 1. In this way we have mapped all of the numbers on the
         number line to a corresponding point on the surface of the circle. Doing this type
         of mapping in higher dimensions is known as constructing a Riemann sphere.
             Instead of mapping the vectors to a point on the surface of a circle, we can just
         as easily map them to a line segment that extends from (0, 0) to (1, 1). Figure 2.3
         also shows this type of mapping, which is a bit easier to understand analytically.
         The line equation of the vector is y = 1 − xc , where c is the number on the number
         line that we are mapping from. The line equation of the segment from (0, 0) to (1,
         1) is simply y = x. By combining these two equations and solving for x, we end up
                                     x
         with the equation y = x+1     . Thus, if we plug any positive real value into the last
         equation, we will always get another number between 0 and 1. It is often tempting
21   Number Systems and Infinity



     to try to imagine a size for infinity—but doing so is actually misleading. Using
     Figure 2.3 as a reference allows us to think of infinity as the direction, pointing due
     east.
         Let’s pause for a moment to consider what we have found so far. The natural
     numbers and integers occupy fixed locations on the number line at regular intervals.
     We know that there is the same number of rational numbers, but strangely enough
     there is a countably infinite number of rationals between any two points on the
     number line. We also isolated an irrational number on the number line, so we know
     that irrational numbers have a fixed place on the line as well. What is truly bizarre
     is that even though there is an infinite number of rational numbers between any two
     rational numbers on the number line, there are infinitely more irrational numbers
     than
     √ rational numbers in the same segment. Going back to the example of isolating
        2 on the number line, there was a countably infinite number of rational√number
     pairs that we could use to get increasingly closer to the real location of 2. Yet
     between any of those pairs of rational numbers there is an uncountably infinite
     number of irrational numbers. It is as if the points on the number line where the
     irrational numbers fall are like holes in which rational numbers are not. However,
     there are many, many more of these irrational holes than non-holes.
         To fully appreciate how truly amazing rational and irrational numbers are, we
     will now use an irrational number as a sort of infinite memory. Because you are
     reading this book, I am going to assume that you have some general idea of how
     computers work. Specifically, you probably already know that computers store
     everything as one long sequence of zeros and ones. You also know that the number
     of natural numbers (or fractions) that you can store in your computer is determined
     solely by how much memory you have; that is, if you want to store twice as many
     numbers as you can now, you need to double your computer’s memory. Therefore,
     no matter how many numbers you have, no matter how large the numbers are, as
     long as they are natural (or rational) and finite in size, there is some amount of
     memory that will do the job of storing the numbers.
         Now, take all of your computer’s memory and arrange it as one long line of zeros
     and ones: 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, . . .. Take this very long number and put a
     zero and a decimal point in front of it. We’ve just translated one huge number into
     a rational number between 0 and 1. By placing this single point at exactly the right
     spot on the number line, we can store an unlimited amount of information. Ah, if
     only it were so simple. In the real world, we simply don’t have the precision required
     to put this method of storing memory into practice. We never will, either, but it’s
     an interesting mental exercise to see that it can be done in theory in an idealized
     world. The point of this whole mental exercise is that in many ways an irrational
     number has as much “information” as an infinite number of natural numbers.
         Figure 2.4 illustrates some of the properties that we have found so far about
     numbers. The set of all of the numbers on the number line is called the real numbers.
     The reals can be divided into rational numbers and irrational numbers. A proper
22           Number Systems and Infinity



                                                   Reals
                                                 ✟!❍
                                               ✟✟   ❍❍
                                              ✟       ❍❍
                                           !✟
                                            ✟          ❍!
                                    Rationals                Irrationals
                                 ✏!                                 !$
                             ✏ ✏✏                                     $$
                                                                        $$
                           ✏✏                                             $$
                        !✏✏       !                                 !       $!
                 Integers &            Pure                Computable Incomputable
                  Naturals           Fractions              Irrationals Irrationals
                        !                  !                        !                !


                        !                  !                        !                !
                                     1 1
                                                               √
                  1,2,3, · · ·        , , ···
                                     2 3
                                                                   2, π            ???
                                 Figure 2.4    Subdivision of the real numbers



             subset, A, of another subset, B, is a set such that all of the members of A are also
             members of B, but there exists some member of B that is not a member of A (for
             example, cars are a proper subset of vehicles). We can now say with certainty that
             the natural numbers are a proper subset of the rationals. Similarly, the irrationals
             have a proper subset known as the computable irrationals. √  You are already familiar
             with some computable irrational numbers, such as π and 2. In the next chapter
             we will define what it means to compute, which will give us some insight into what
             uncomputable irrational numbers look like.


2.5 Further Reading
              Beckmann, P. (1977). A history of π (Fourth ed.). Boulder, Colo.: Golem Press.
              Dauben, J. W. (1990). Georg Cantor: His mathematics and philosophy of the
              infinite. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

              Ore, O. (1988). Number theory and its history. New York: Dover.
              Rucker, R. (1995). Infinity and the mind: The science and philosophy of the
              infinite. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
              Stewart, I. (1996). From here to infinity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
3   Computability and Incomputability




          Computer Science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.
                                                                      — E. W. Dijkstra


                 To use: Apply shampoo to wet hair. Massage to lather, then rinse. Repeat.
                                    — A typical hair-washing algorithm that fails to halt


                         But let your communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever
                                                        is more than these cometh of evil.
                                        — An early proposal for binary code, Matthew 5:37




    For most people, the notion of what is computable is closely related to what
    types of programs exist. A typical computer has an operating system that acts as
    an interface between the computer hardware and the software. Window systems
    that provide graphical user interfaces to other programs are at an even higher level
    of abstraction. A typical program that could operate in this environment is a word-
    processing program that allows the user to type in keystrokes and to perform mouse
    actions such as pointing, clicking, dragging, and using menus. Many things appear
    to be happening at once, but in fact each action by the user is processed by the
    computer program during a discrete time interval. When you type a key to insert
    text into your document, the program must update the graphical representation of
    your document by drawing the raw pixels that make up the letters. The program will
    usually have to update some internal representation of the text of your document as
    well. Similarly, when you use a mouse, the program translates the mouse clicks to a
    coordinate system and performs whatever action is required to make the graphical
    representation of your document look the way it is supposed to. Each action is
    carefully coordinated by the computer program, which can be a daunting task,
    considering the thousands of details that go into writing a program such as a word
    processor.
24   Computability and Incomputability



         The example above illustrates an interactive session that a human could have
     with a program; however, there is no reason why the session would have to be
     interactive at all. As a thought experiment, imagine that we could record each
     keystroke and mouse action. The recording could be saved into a file that has
     strings1 of the form keystroke ’k’, mouse-down (113, 156), or mouse-up (115,
     234). It is always possible to take a program like a word processor and convert it
     into a similar program that processes a file that has the recorded actions. If one
     of those actions corresponded to pulling down a menu and selecting a “save file”
     option, then one form of the output of the program can be saved as well. Moreover,
     each graphical action taken by the word processor could be saved into another file
     with entries indicating which pixels were drawn and in what color. In this way it
     is possible to convert any program into a form that takes one long string as input
     and produces one long string as output.
         As a historical footnote, in the early days of computers, both programs and
     input data had to be submitted to a computer via an antiquated device known as
     a punch-card reader. The output of the program could then be sent to a printer
     or some other device. Graphical user interfaces are a very convenient way of using
     a computer, but in no way does the user interface change what is fundamentally
     possible for a computer to compute. If a mad computer programmer had the desire
     to, there is no reason why he couldn’t have simulated an entire interactive computer
     session back in the 1950s with punch cards and printer output.
         Therefore, without losing any of the notion of what it means to compute, we
     can completely disregard the “bells and whistles” of modern computers and only
     concentrate on the gist of what happens inside of a computer. What is left is a
     picture not unlike the earliest computer mainframes that handled only punch cards
     as input. Why bother to do this? If we were to attempt to discuss the notion of
     computability in the context of user interfaces, sound cards, mice, and laser printers,
     there would be no clear way of reducing all of the detail into something that looks
     remotely mathematical. If we could not reduce what happens inside of computers
     into some mathematical formalism, there would be no way of proving or disproving
     the properties that computers have.
         Scientists like to boil things down to the simplest terms possible, and it turns
     out that this picture of having a string of input and a string of output is still
     overly verbose for a theoretical computer scientist’s tastes. Just as we were able to
     dispense with most of the details of how modern computers operate, so it is possible
     to dispense with the idea that programs have “strings” of input and output. It is
     possible (and also theoretically useful) to convert a program, input string, or output
     string into a single natural number.

        1 The term string will be used to denote any sequence of letters, numbers, or digits, or any

     other type of list.
25            Computability and Incomputability



3.1 Gödelization
              Kurt Gödel, one of the greatest mathematicians of the twentieth century, literally
              shocked his contemporaries with some of his mathematical results. We will talk
              more about Gödel and his contributions to mathematics toward the end of this
              book part; however, in this section we will concentrate on the process for converting
              many numbers into one number that bears his name.
                  A Gödelization is a method for mapping many natural numbers into a single
              natural number. The details of how the mapping is performed are not very inter-
              esting, but the fact that it can be done is extremely important. Recall that the
              input or output to a program can be represented as some finite-length string. Also
              note that a program can be represented in the same way. Don’t be bothered by
              the fact that one form of the input string may look like keystroke ’k’ or some
              other nonnumerical form. We can always adopt some convention whereby we agree
              to represent actions such as keystroke ’k’ by two natural numbers, one for the
              action, keystroke, and the other for the key that was pressed, ’k’. It is always
              possible to perform some mapping such that any string is unambiguously coded
              into a sequence of integers. The interesting question is: How can many numbers be
              encoded into one?
                  The key to the whole process is the fact that every number has a unique prime
              factorization. If you pick any natural number, x, then there is exactly one sequence
              of prime numbers, px1 , px2 , . . . , pxn , such that the product of the n prime numbers
              is equal to x. Now, let’s go back to looking at a program’s input, which we earlier
              agreed to think of as a sequence of numbers. If there are n numbers in the sequence,
              then let every number in the sequence be denoted by x1 , x2 , . . . , xn . To calculate
              the Gödel number of the input string, we use the first n prime numbers and calculate
                                             n
                                             "
                                                   pxi i = px1 1 px2 2 · · · pxnn ,
                                             i=1

              which forms a unique natural number. Granted, Gödel numbers will tend to be
              huge in size, but who cares? Given a Gödel number, we can reconstruct the original
              string by taking the prime factorization of the Gödel number. If there are thirteen
              2s in the prime factorization of the Gödel number, then that means that the first
              number in the original string was 13. If there are eighty-seven 3s in the prime
              factorization, then the second number in the original string was 87. And if there is
              a single 5 in the prime factorization, then the third number was 1.
                  Gödelization adds another simplification to studying the nature of computation.
              Instead of worrying about programs with multiple input and output sequences we
              can now ignore most of the details and just concentrate on functions that take a
              single number as input and produce a single number as output. Even with this
              restriction, a computer program that operates in this manner is still doing all of
26          Computability and Incomputability



             How Many Prime Numbers Exist?                                              Digression 3.1

              Constructing a Gödel number from a string depends on there existing an infinite
              number of prime numbers. If there were only a finite number of prime numbers, say n
              of them, then it would be impossible to encode strings of length greater than n. Here
              is an extremely elegant proof discovered by Euclid around the third century B.C. that
              shows that there are an infinite number of primes.

              If there are a finite number of prime numbers, then we could list all of them as
              p1 , p2 , . . . , pn , where pn is the largest prime number. We will now construct a new
              number from these n prime numbers by taking the product of all n prime numbers
              and adding one
                                                n
                                                "
                                         p′ =         pi + 1 = (p1 p2 · · · pn ) + 1.
                                                i=1

              What does the prime factorization of p′ look like? Before you answer, take note of
              the fact that none of the n prime numbers, p1 , . . . , pn , evenly divides p′ . Try it and
              you will see that you always get a remainder of 1. But if no prime number evenly
              divides p′ , then one of two things must be true: Either p′ is prime or it is not and
              there exists some other prime number greater than pn that does evenly divide p′ . We
              don’t care which is the case, since either implies that there is another prime number
              greater than pn . Therefore, there must be an infinite number of primes.




            the “hard” part of computing. Therefore, without loss of generalization, when we
            speak of computation, we will sometimes refer to the computation as manipulating
            strings, numbers, or even bits. It really doesn’t matter. What does matter is that
            the representation of a computer’s input and output can always be converted from
            one form to another. We will simply use whatever form is most convenient at the
            time.
                Another conclusion that can be reached from the ideas of this section is that
            there are as many programs as there are natural numbers, since we can Gödelize
            programs as well. This fact will be expanded on toward the end of this chapter.
            In the next section we will get into the details of what it means to compute by
            studying some models of computation.


3.2 Models of Computation
            There is a subtle diﬀerence between computations and models of computation that
            we should examine. It is fair to think of a computation as a “method” for producing
            one number from another. Computer textbooks often speak of algorithms and
            instructions. If it makes you feel more comfortable with the subject, you can think
27   Computability and Incomputability



     of a computation, method, algorithm, or instruction as merely a recipe like one you
     would find in any cookbook. We are, after all, cooking here, but with numbers
     instead of food.
         What is a model of computation? Generally speaking, a model of computation
     describes how to build recipes or, if you like, a recipe for recipes. Actually, compu-
     tations describe how to map numbers to other numbers, and models of computation
     describe how to construct the mappings.
         In the past century, many mathematicians have grappled with the problem of
     how to describe all of the infinitely many computations that are possible. The
     problem, put more concisely, is: What is the minimal set of rules that we can use
     to construct computations such that every possible computation can be realized by
     the rules? Many models of computation have been proposed in the past century.
     What follows is a brief description of some of the better-known ones. What they
     have in common is that each model of computation operates on numbers, strings,
     and symbols by manipulating them at discrete time steps. Moreover, each model
     has a well-defined “program,” “input,” and “output.” If the presentation of the
     models is too formal for your tastes, feel free to skim the descriptions and jump
     ahead to the end of this section.


     General Recursive Functions General recursive functions are constructed by
     composing a small number of rules together. The idea is that one can take a few
     simple functions and construct more complex functions by applying the following
     rules repeatedly. The rules will either specify a base general recursive function, in
     which case a name and an example are given, or a rule for composing a new general
     recursive function.

        • Zero:    The zero function returns zero for any argument, e.g., Z(x) = 0.

        • Successor:      The successor function adds one to its argument, e.g., S(x) =
          x + 1.

        • Projection:            The projection rule simply states that a general recursive
          function is allowed to return any one of its arguments as the result, e.g.,
          Pi (x1 , · · · , xn ) = xi .

        • Composition: The composition rule allows for a new function to be con-
          structed as the composition of two or more functions. Thus, if g(x) and f (x)
          are general recursive functions, then so is g(f (x)).

        • Recursion: General recursive functions can have recursive definitions. For
          example, if g(x) and h(x) are general recursive, then so is f (x, y) defined as
          f (x, 0) = g(x), for y = 0, and f (x, y + 1) = f (h(x), y), for all other y.
28   Computability and Incomputability



        • Minimization: A general recursive function can be expressed as the min-
          imization of another general recursive function. For example, if g(x, y) is
          general recursive, then so is the function f (x) = µy[g(x, y) = 100], where µ
          is the minimization operator. We can interpret f (x) as being “the smallest
          value of y such that g(x, y) = 100.” Note that there may be no y that satisfies
          the constraint for the supplied x, in which case f is undefined for that x.
        Notice that the definition of general recursive functions is closely coupled to
     natural numbers, in that the functions clearly operate on the natural numbers.
     If we wanted to construct a general recursive function to add two numbers, the
     definition would look like:
                          f (x, 0) = P1 (x) = x
                     f (x, y + 1) = S(P3 (x, y, f (x, y))) = f (x, y) + 1.
     Here we can think of a “program” as being a general recursive function that is
     constructed, of the program’s “input” as the natural number that we plug into the
     function, and of the program “output” as the natural number that we get as a
     result.

     Turing Machines A Turing machine is a hypothetical device proposed by Alan
     Turing in 1936. The machine has a read/write head mounted to a tape of infinite
     length. The tape consists of an infinite number of discrete cells in which the Tur-
     ing machine can read or write symbols. At every discrete point in time a Turing
     machine exists in one and only one state. The “program” for a Turing machine
     consists of a state transition table with entries that contain: the current state, the
     symbol underneath the head, the next state that the machine should enter, the new
     symbol that should be written, and the direction that the tape should move (left,
     right, or none). There is also a unique state known as the starting state and one or
     more halting states. When a Turing machine starts up, the “input” to the program
     consists of the symbols already written on the tape. At each time step, the Tur-
     ing machine performs an action, determined by the current state and the symbol

          State    Input                        Action/Output           Next State
          Start    ⋆                            get in cruise lane      cruise
          Cruise   cruise lane clear            drive at cruise speed   cruise
          Cruise   slow driver ahead            get in pass lane        pass
          Pass     cruise lane clear            get in cruise lane      cruise
          Pass     slow driver in cruise lane   accelerate              pass
          ⋆        desired exit ahead           exit highway            halt


                     Table 3.1   A driving “program” for a Turing machine
29   Computability and Incomputability



      Alan Turing: A Mini-Biography                                       Digression 3.2

       Alan Turing was born in 1912. As one of the pioneers in the theory of computation,
       his importance to the field is staggering. He participated in many public debates
       concerning the future of computers and artificial intelligence, and as part of this
       activity he invented what is now popularly known as the Turing test, a method to
       determine if a computer has “intelligence.” During World War II, Turing was part
       of a British research team that cracked the Germans’ most secret encryption device.
       The success of the project allowed Winston Churchill to listen in on many of the Axis
       powers’ most classified command decisions.

       Alan Turing was also a homosexual. While filing a complaint to the police department
       about a burglary of his house, he implied that he had more than a casual relation-
       ship with a possible suspect. The police interrogated Turing regarding this, and he
       confessed to being a homosexual. Subsequently, he was forced to undergo hormone
       therapy that led to depression. In 1954, Turing was simultaneously experimenting
       with chemicals and making candied apples. In what may or may have not been sui-
       cide, he ate a poisoned apple and died (Hodges, 1983).




     underneath the head. This action may involve writing a new symbol, moving the
     head, and/or moving into a new internal state. The Turing machine continues this
     process until one of the halting states is reached. The “output” of the program
     consists of the remaining symbols on the tape.
         At first glance, Turing machines seem very alien, but in actuality most people
     are familiar with how they work on an intuitive level. Table 3.1 illustrates a sort of
     Turing machine algorithm (without reference to the tape) for driving on a highway.
     To simplify things, we will consider only four types of states while driving: entering
     the highway (the starting state), cruising at a steady speed, passing a slow driver,
     and exiting the highway. For passing and cruising, we consider two special cases:
     when we should maintain the current state and when we should switch to another
     state.
         In the table the ⋆ character is a wild card, meaning that it matches any possibility
     for that entry. Thus, according to the table, whenever you see the desired exit, you
     should exit the highway and go into the halting state, regardless of what state you
     are currently in.

     Lambda Calculus The λ-calculus is a model of computation proposed by Alonzo
     Church in 1941. In it, computations are defined in terms of λ-expressions that
     consist of either a symbol or a list of λ-expressions, or have the form:

                        (λbound-variable(λ-expression)).λ-expression.
30           Computability and Incomputability



             The last form describes a way of rewriting the leftmost λ-expression. The result is
             to take the leftmost λ-expression and replace every occurrence of the bound variable
             with the lambda expression on the right-hand side. For example (λx(f x)).a = (f a),
             since we replace every occurrence of x in (f x) by a.
                 In λ-calculus the “program” corresponds to the left-hand λ-expression, and
             the “input” is the right-hand λ-expression. The “output” corresponds to the λ-
             expression resulting from continuously expanding the input applied to the pro-
             gram. You may be inclined to think that expanding a λ-expression is a one-step
             process but, in fact, λ-expressions can consist of λ-expressions nested within more
             λ-expressions, which means that expanding a single λ-expression may take many
             steps. The λ-calculus is very similar to the programming language Lisp, which is
             discussed in further detail shortly.

                General recursive functions, Turing machines, and λ-calculus are not the only
             formal models of computation, just the best known. There are actually several
             more. You probably noticed that each model was very diﬀerent from the others. An
             interesting question at this time is: Are there any functions that can be computed
             by one model of computation but not by another? In 1941, Church proved that λ-
             calculus was capable of representing exactly the same functions as general recursive
             functions. Later Turing proved that Turing machines could compute exactly the
             same functions as λ-calculus, which proved that all three models of computation
             are equivalent. This is a truly remarkable result, considering how diﬀerent the three
             models of computation are. In Church’s 1941 paper he made a statement that is
             now known as the Church-Turing thesis: Any function that can be called computable
             can be computed by λ-calculus, a Turing machine, or a general recursive function.
                Recall the point that was made about functions describing relationships between
             numbers and models of computation describing functions. Well, the Church-Turing
             thesis is yet another level more fundamental than a model of computation. As a
             statement about models of computation, it is not subject to proof in the usual sense;
             thus, it is impossible to prove that the thesis is correct. One could disprove it by
             coming up with a model of computation over discrete elements that could calculate
             things that one of the other models could not; however, this has not happened.
             The fact that every posed model of computation has always been exactly equivalent
             to (or weaker than) one of the others lends strong support to the Church-Turing
             thesis.


3.3 Lisp and Stutter
             So far we have really discussed computation only in very broad terms. It would be
             nice to demonstrate exactly how one could compute some useful functions with one
             of the three mentioned models. As we shall see, there is a certain beauty in deriving
             higher mathematical functions from such primitive beginnings. To illustrate this
             point, we will now examine a simple computer language that is as powerful as the
31   Computability and Incomputability



     other models but is a bit more understandable. In the late 1950s John McCarthy
     created a computer language known as Lisp (which stands for list processing). Lisp
     was inspired by λ-calculus, but I like to think of it as a close cousin of general
     recursive functions as well. A testament to the elegance of Lisp is that it is one of
     the few “old” languages still in common use today.
         Modern Lisp (Common Lisp) is a very rich language, with hundreds of defined
     functions, macros, and operators. What follows is a description of a subset of Lisp
     that I will refer to as Stutter.2 Stutter is an interpreted language which means that
     all expressions are evaluated during the runtime of a program, unlike compilers,
     which translate modern computer languages into the native machine language of
     the computer or an intermediate language (as in the case of Java and its bytecode
     compilation). The heart of the Stutter interpreter is the read-eval-print loop, which
     does exactly what its name describes. More specifically, when using Stutter, the
     user is prompted by the ‘>’ prompt. After the user types in a Stutter expression
     and presses the “Enter” key, the computer evaluates the expression and prints the
     result, which brings us back to the “read” portion of the loop.
         But what is a Stutter expression? In Stutter everything is either a list or an
     atom. An atom is simply a sequence of characters, such as bob, xyz, or 256. There
     is nothing significant about any of these atoms, including 256 since the Stutter
     interpreter has no hardwired notion of what the value of 256 means to you and
     me. There are also four reserved punctuation characters that have special meaning:
     ‘(’, ‘)’, ‘’’, and ‘;’. Other than these four characters an atom can consist of any
     sequence of nonblank characters in any order. The parentheses are used to contain
     lists, and the quotation character is used to quote atoms and lists. The reason
     why the quotation character is necessary will be explained in the examples below.
     The semicolon is used as a comment delimiter, that is, any text in a single line of
     a Stutter program following a semicolon is ignored by the Stutter interpreter and
     serves only to add comments within a Stutter program.
         A list can have any number of members of any type, including other lists. Func-
     tion definitions in Stutter are also lists, which lends to the beauty of the language,
     since functions can operate on other functions. As a special case, the empty list
     is denoted as either () or nil, and can be considered both an atom and a list. A
     function call is yet another list of the form (f a b c), which means that the named
     function, f, will be called with the supplied arguments, a, b, and c. We must also
     make a distinction between the name of an atom and the value of an atom. Because
     it is useful to store things in variables, we are allowed to treat each atom as a vari-
     able. In this case, we say that the atom and variable are “bound” to each other.
     Later we will see how one can extract the value of an atom, but for now note the
     distinction that an atom unevaluated is itself, while an atom evaluated results in
     its value.
        2 Motivated readers can consult the C source code to Stutter. All of the examples from this

     chapter were produced from the supplied Stutter interpreter.
32   Computability and Incomputability



         In the examples that follow, we will see the input to the Stutter interpreter as
     the text immediately following the ‘>’ prompt. The line immediately following the
     input is the Stutter interpreter’s output. Sometimes the output will be omitted if
     it is not interesting. To start, let’s examine how things look when quoted:
           > ’testing
           testing
           > ’testing-1-2-3
           testing-1-2-3
           > ’(this is one way of writing a string of text)
           (this is one way of writing a string of text)
           > ’(here is a list (with a list and another (list)))
           (here is a list (with a list and another (list)))
           > this-is-an-unquoted-undefined-atom
           Error: unbound atom "this-is-an-unquoted-undefined-atom"
         In the last example, when we typed in the unquoted atom, the Stutter interpreter
     responded with an error message because the unquoted atom was not bound to any
     value. We can set the value of an atom with the set function. Because this is our
     first use of a Stutter function, a brief digression is in order. In general, all Stutter
     functions either are built-in primitives or are user-defined. We will see how to define
     a user-defined function a little later, but for now let’s examine how a function call
     is evaluated. When the Stutter interpreter is asked to call a function such as (f a
     b c), the Stutter interpreter will first evaluate the first element in the list, f, which
     must be bound to a function or an error will occur. If f is a user-defined function,
     then the Stutter interpreter will immediately evaluate the arguments, a, b, and c.
         For built-in functions, things are a little more subtle. The built-in functions
     are either value functions or special functions. Value functions behave just like
     user-defined functions but are primitives in the Stutter language because there is
     no way of defining them as user functions. Some value functions that we will
     encounter later on are car, cdr, and cons. The set function is also a primitive
     value function. Special functions behave similarly to the other functions except
     that their arguments are not evaluated initially. This allows the special functions
     to evaluate arguments only if it is appropriate. For example, the quote, character ‘’’
     is really equivalent to the special function quote. Instead of using the single quote
     we could also type (quote a), which evaluates to a—not the value of a. Later we
     will use another special function, if.
         To use the set function, we supply it with two arguments. The first argument
     should evaluate to the atom that we want to bind a value to. The second argument
     is also evaluated, and the result is bound to the atom the first argument evaluated
     to. Most uses of set will look like (set ’a b), with the first atom being quoted.
     Requiring the quote may seem like an unnecessary inconvenience, but it actually
     gives us some latitude in how we define things. Consider the examples:
33   Computability and Incomputability



           > (set ’name ’call-me-Ishmael)
           > name
           call-me-Ishmael
           > (set ’ten ’10)
           > ten
           10
           > (set ten ’5-plus-5) ;;; Change the value of ’10 indirectly.
           > ten
           10
           > 10
           5-plus-5
         Let’s now look at how car, cdr, and cons work. All three functions are used
     to manipulate lists in some way. Computer science has had some strange eﬀects on
     spoken language, and one such oddity is that Lisp programmers often say things
     like “the car of the list” or “the cdr of something.” What they really mean in
     the first example is “the result of calling the car function with the given list as an
     argument.” That’s too much of a mouthful for my tastes, so you should not be
     confused when I use the programmer’s verbal shortcut.
         The car function always returns the first element in a list. If you try to take the
     car of something that is not a list, an error will occur. As a special case, the car
     of nil is also nil. Complementary to car, the cdr function returns the supplied
     list with everything but the first element. If you like, you can think of cdr as being
     synonymous with “everything but the car.” Thus, the cdr of a list with a single
     element is nil, and as another special case the cdr of nil is also nil
         The cons function is used to construct a new list from two arguments. The first
     argument will be the car of the result list and the second argument will be the cdr
     of the result. Thus, for any list l except nil, (cons (car l) (cdr l)) is always
     equal to l. Here are some example uses of car, cdr, and cons.
           > (car ’((a b c) x y))
           (a b c)
           > (cdr ’((a b c) x y))
           (x y)
           > (car (car ’((a b c) x y)))
           a
           > (cdr (cdr ’((a b c) x y)))
           (y)
           > (car (cdr (cdr (car ’((a b c) x y)))))
           c
           > (cons ’a nil)
           (a)
           > (cons ’a ’(b))
34   Computability and Incomputability



           (a b)
           > (cons ’(a b c) ’(x y))
           ((a b c) x y)
           > (cons ’(a b c) nil)
           ((a b c))
         During the lifetime of a program, it is often necessary to ask questions. Stutter is
     no exception to this, so to facilitate this need, Stutter has a built-in special function
     known as if, which takes three arguments. The first argument is a condition. The
     if function evaluates the condition, and if it is true, then if will return the second
     argument evaluated but not evaluate the third argument at all. If the condition is
     false, then if will not evaluate the second argument but return the third argument
     evaluated instead. Any missing arguments are presumed to be nil. But what is
     “true” and “false” in Stutter? We will take “false” to be synonymous with nil and
     “true” to mean anything that is not nil. Because it useful to have a consistent name
     for the concept of “true,” we will use t to mean just that. Moreover, t evaluates to
     itself because it is defined by (set ’t ’t). Yet, in Stutter there is nothing special
     about the symbol t; it is just an atom like any other atom. By themselves, if
     expressions are not very interesting, but here are two that illustrate how they work:
           > (if nil ’(it was true) ’(it was false))
           (it was false)
           > (if ’blah-blah-blah ’(it was true) ’(it was false))
           (it was true)
        In general, if statements usually take the form: (if (condition-expression)
     (then-expression) (else-expression)). The real power of an if statement is
     when the “then” or “else” portions of the statement contain even more expressions.
        The last type of Stutter expression that will be highlighted is a special type of
     expression known as a lambda expression. Lambda expressions in Stutter are similar
     to λ-expressions in λ-calculus, in that they allow the user to define new functions.
     The symbol lambda is not a function per se, but a special atom. In general, a
     lambda expression will look like (lambda (arg1 arg2) (function body ...)).
     You should read the last expression as “This is a function with two arguments.
     When the function is called, the function body is evaluated, with the supplied
     arguments replacing the arguments that appear in the body.”
        That’s all there is to Stutter. Nothing else. Your first reaction to Stutter may
     be that it is a rather weak programming language. For example, how would one
     go about adding numbers? The concept of numbers doesn’t even appear in the
     language definition, let alone addition. Yet Stutter is as powerful as any other
     programming language. It is universal in that it can do anything that the other
     three models of computation can do (as well as your home computer3 ). How so? To
        3 Technically speaking, your home PC is weaker than any of the other models of computation

     because it has only finite memory.
35   Computability and Incomputability



     illustrate this, we will reinvent the basic mathematical operations in Stutter. Doing
     so will also illustrate how to use lambda expressions.
         To begin with, we need a representation for the numbers. For a start, let’s define
     zero:

           > (set ’0 nil)

         That’s fine, but there is an infinite number of other numbers to deal with. Instead
     of giving a unique definition for each number, we will define what it means to be a
     number. More specifically, for every number there is always another number that
     is one greater than the first. In this spirit, let’s define an increment function:

           > (set ’1+ (lambda (x) (cons t x)))

         In English the 1+ function definition reads as “take the argument (which is
     presumably a list) and append the symbol t to the front of it.” Now, if we wanted
     to, we could define other numbers:

           > (set ’1 (1+ 0))
           > (set ’2 (1+ 1))
           > (set ’3 (1+ 2))
             ...
           > (set ’10 (1+ 9))

        But these definitions are not strictly necessary, since Stutter now understands
     that ’(t t t) means the same thing as (1+ (1+ (1+ 0))), which means the same
     thing as 3 does to us. This may seem like a cumbersome way of representing
     numbers, but not for Stutter.
        It would also be useful to have a notion of “one less” than some number. The only
     diﬃculty is that all natural numbers are positive. Thus, the following decrement
     function will do just fine for positive numbers:

           > (set ’1- (lambda (x) (cdr x)))

        Now that we have numbers, how do we do useful things with them? Let’s start
     with addition:

           > (set ’+ (lambda (x y) (if y (1+ (+ x (1- y))) x)))

         This definition is clearly recursive since it refers to itself. The definition in
     English reads “The sum of two numbers is defined as the first number if the second
     number is 0. If the second number is not 0 then the result is equal to 1 plus the
     sum of the first number and 1 less than the second number.” In other words,
     if you ask Stutter to compute (5 + 2), it will roughly carry out the expansion:
     (5 + 2) = (1 + (5 + 1)) = (1 + (1 + (5 + 0))) = 7. Let’s try it out:
36           Computability and Incomputability



                   > (+ 5 2)
                   (t t t t t t t)
                   > (+ 9 3)
                   (t t t t t t t t t t t t)
                Multiplication and exponentiation are just as easy to define as addition since
             they have their own elegant recursive definitions:
                   > (set ’* (lambda (x y) (if y (+ (* x (1- y)) x) 0)))
                   > (set ’^ (lambda (x y) (if y (* x (^ x (1- y))) 1)))
                With these definitions, we can now do some fancy calculating:
                   > (* 3 5)
                   (t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t)
                   > (^ 2 4) ;;; 2 raised to the 4th power.
                   (t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t)
                   > (^ (+ 1 2) (* 2 2)) ;;; 3 raised to the 4th power.
                   (t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t
                    t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t
                    t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t)
                 Included with the Stutter source code are Stutter statements that define many
             more useful operations and predicates, such as subtraction, division, logarithm, an
             equality test, and greater than and less than. Moreover, if you are still troubled by
             the fact that numbers are represented by very long lists, there is a simple function
             that converts lists of the form ’(1 2 3) into unary lists (which is the form that
             we have been using) and back. It is also possible to define a representation for
             floating-point numbers and to define more complex operations, such as the square
             root.


3.4 Equivalence and Time Complexity
             Since all of the mentioned models of computation are equivalent, in that each of
             them can compute exactly what all of the others can compute, what can we say
             about the relative eﬃciency of each model? Is one type of model more eﬃcient
             than another, in the sense that it can do exactly what another model can do but
             faster? There are some diﬀerences in speed between the diﬀerent models, but not
             a significant amount. Why this is so is the topic of this section.
                 Computer science theory has a branch, known as time complexity theory, that
             deals with the question of how fast something can be computed. In each model of
             computation, the “computer” has to take some step-by-step actions. For example,
             in one time step the Turing machine reads the symbol underneath the head, writes
37   Computability and Incomputability




        (+ 2 3)                                        ;;; Expand   (+ 2 3)
          (1+ (+ 2 (1- 3)))                            ;;; Evaluate (1- 3) -> 2
          (1+ (+ 2 2))                                 ;;; Expand   (+ 2 2)
            (1+ (1+ (+ 2 (1- 2))))                     ;;; Evaluate (1- 2) -> 1
            (1+ (1+ (+ 2 1)))                          ;;; Expand   (+ 2 1)
              (1+ (1+ (1+ (+ 2 (1- 1)))))              ;;; Evaluate (1- 1) -> 0
              (1+ (1+ (1+ (+ 2 0))))                   ;;; Evaluate (+ 2 0) -> 2
              (1+ (1+ (1+ 2)))                         ;;; Evaluate (1+ 2) -> 3
            (1+ (1+ 3))                                ;;; Evaluate (1+ 3) -> 4
          (1+ 4)                                       ;;; Evaluate (1+ 4) -> 5
        5


                         Table 3.2    Stutter execution path of (+ 2 3)


     the appropriate new symbol, moves the tape left or right, and then makes a virtual
     jump to the next state. For a general recursive function, λ-calculus expression, or
     Stutter program there is also an iterative process taking place. You can imagine
     that each primitive or built-in function takes exactly one time step to execute, and
     that user-defined functions take as many time steps as the number of primitive
     functions they ultimately call upon. Modern digital computers also have a fetch-
     execute cycle that involves retrieving a machine language instruction from memory,
     decoding it, then executing it.
         How do we measure the speed of a computer program? First of all, some pro-
     grams will always take longer than others, given the same input. As an example,
     let’s simulate how Stutter would add the numbers 2 and 3. Recall that addition
     was defined as (lambda (x y) (if y (1+ (+ x (1- y))) x)). Table 3.2 shows
     roughly what takes place to compute the final result by indenting each level of re-
     cursion. The listing is simplified somewhat, in that most of the details have been
     omitted of how, say, (1- 3) is evaluated, since it is not self-recursive and simply
     calls cdr. Moreover, instead of expanding each recursive function call into the full
     function body, I have expanded recursive function calls only into the portion of the
     body that is evaluated by the if expression. Looking closely at how the + function
     executes, there appear to be three types of steps. First of all, there are several
     expansions of the + function because it recursively refers to itself. Next, there are
     three 1+ calls and three 1- calls. The fact that there are three of each of these calls
     is a consequence of 3 being the second argument. If 7 been the second argument,
     then there would have been seven calls to 1+ and 1-. Likewise, the four expansions
     are a result of 3 being the second argument. Putting this all together, we find that
     the total number of steps for performing the operation (+ a b) is roughly 3b + 1.
38   Computability and Incomputability



         Obviously, the smart thing to do would be to make sure that the second argument
     is at least as small as the first. If we amended the + function so that this check
     is performed initially, then we would have the additional overhead of computing
     which is the smaller of the two arguments. The supplied Stutter code contains a
     Stutter definition for the relational operator <, which takes approximately the same
     number of steps as the smaller of the two arguments. Therefore, combining all of
     this into a “smart” + operation would yield a total number of steps roughly equal
     to 4x + 1, where x is the smaller of the two arguments.
         This is still not quite the answer that we are looking for, since we really don’t
     want to estimate the time a function takes to execute on the basis of only one of
     its arguments. What we really need is a way of expressing the execution time as a
     function of the length of the input. In the case of the + function, the input length
     is equal to the length of the two list arguments. Therefore, let’s agree to call x the
     sum of the length of the two arguments, a and b. As a worst case, let’s also assume
     that a and b are really equal to one another. Why? If one of the two arguments
     was less than the other, then, since the + function executes in time proportional to
     its smallest argument, this would be faster than if a and b were really equal. With
     this assumption the smallest argument is equal to x2 . Therefore, the execution time
     of the + function, expressed in terms of the length of the input, is equal to 2x + 1.
     This means that if you give the + function any two arguments, you can reasonably
     expect it to take about 2x + 1 steps to compute the result.
         However, we are not yet finished with simplifying the time measure. Time com-
     plexity analysis is one of the few mathematical disciplines in which one is supposed
     to take shortcuts. More specifically, the expression 2x + 1 is just an aﬃne linear
     function, and the 2 is simply a coeﬃcient. Since we really want to know how well
     the + function scales when we give it really big numbers, the 2 doesn’t tell us any-
     thing special, since one computer can easily be twice as fast as another. Moreover,
     if instead of 2x + 1, the number of steps that a function takes was something more
     complicated, like 21 x4 − 2x2 + 82x + 13, under time complexity analysis we would
     simplify the whole expression down to x4 , which is the most significant term in the
     polynomial. The reason we are allowed to do this is not as superficial as I have made
     it seem, and is in fact mathematically sound. As an exercise you could compute
     1 4       2                          4
     2 x − 2x + 82x + 13 divided by x on a calculator with some very large values for
     x. As you increase the size of x, the ratio of the numbers will eventually approach a
     constant factor of 21 . We are allowed to simplify time complexity expressions in this
     manner because the ratio approaches a constant value. A computer scientist would
     express the x4 time complexity measure with what is known as “big-Oh” notation,
     or O(x4 ), which is just a formal way of saying that a function or program takes
     about x4 time steps to execute, given an input of length x.
         Now back to the issue of how fast the + function is. Since we are now in agreement
     that the addition operation takes time proportional to x, we will denote this fact by
     saying that + has a time complexity of O(x). Intuitively, this analysis makes sense,
39   Computability and Incomputability




        (* 2 3)                              ;;; Expand   (* 2 3)
          (+ (* 2 (1- 3)) 2)                 ;;; Evaluate (1- 3) -> 2
          (+ (* 2 2) 2)                      ;;; Expand   (* 2 2)
            (+ (+ (* 2 (1- 2)) 2) 2)         ;;; Evaluate (1- 2) -> 1
            (+ (+ (* 2 1) 2) 2)              ;;; Expand   (* 2 1)
              (+ (+ (+ (* 2 (1- 1)) 2) 2) 2) ;;; Evaluate (1- 1) -> 0
              (+ (+ (+ (* 2 0) 2) 2) 2)      ;;; Evaluate (* 2 0) -> 0
              (+ (+ (+ 0 2) 2) 2)            ;;; Evaluate (+ 0 2) -> 2
            (+ (+ 2 2) 2)                    ;;; Evaluate (+ 2 2) -> 4
          (+ 4 2)                            ;;; Evaluate (+ 4 2) -> 6
        6


                         Table 3.3   Stutter execution path of (* 2 3).


     since our smart + operation is very similar to the way you would “add” two piles
     of stones. You would take one stone from the smaller of the two piles and place it
     into the larger pile, repeating the process until the smaller pile was gone. If you
     doubled the size of your original pile of stones, then the whole task would take you
     twice as long as before. This is exactly what it means to have a time complexity of
     O(x): If you multiply the input size by n, then the task will take roughly n times
     as long as before. Isn’t it nice to see that mathematics agrees with intuition?
         We are now going to take a quicker look at multiplication in Stutter. The
     execution of * is illustrated in Table 3.3. The multiplication listing is very similar
     to the listing for addition. Note, however, that we did not expand each of the +
     function calls. A quick look of the listing shows that to perform (* a b) requires
     b+1 expansions, b 1- operations, and b + operations, with a always being the second
     argument to the + function. As before, the worst-case scenario for the * function
     is for a and b to be equal to one another. Thus, denoting the input length by x,
     we know that a and b are equal to x2 . A quick estimate of the running time reveals
     that the costliest portion of the function is the x2 additions that we have to make
     with x2 being the second argument. Since we are performing an O(x) operation
     x                              x
      2 times with input length 2 , the time complexity of the * function is equal to
          2
     O(x ), which means that if you double the size of the arguments to the * function,
     you can reasonably expect the function to take four times as long. Similarly, if you
     increased the size of the arguments by a factor of n, it would take n2 times as long to
     compute the product. This means that in some ways multiplication is “harder” than
     addition, but you knew this already. Once again, mathematics confirms intuition.
         We are now ready to go back to the question posed at the beginning of this
     section, “Which model of computation is more eﬃcient than the others?” If you were
     hoping for a definitive answer, then I am afraid you are going to be disappointed,
40           Computability and Incomputability



             since some models of computation are ideally suited for certain problems that are
             diﬃcult for other models. However, what is truly interesting is that no matter what
             the problem is and no matter what model you use to solve it, any of the other models
             can compute the same result in time proportional to some polynomial of what it
             took the first model to compute it. In other words, if it takes Stutter O(f (x)) time
             steps to compute some function, then in the worst case a Turing machine can do
             the same thing in O(g(f (x))) time, where g is a polynomial function.
                Polynomial functions always have the form

                                 an xn + an−1 xn−1 + · · · + a2 x2 + a1 x + a0 ,

             where the ai terms are coeﬃcients and n is the largest power. Under time complex-
             ity analysis we would simplify the above function to O(xn ). Computer scientists like
             functions that take polynomial time because of all the possible functions, polynomi-
             als are relatively well-behaved. On the other extreme, many well-known problems
             have no known solution that takes less than exponential time. To see the diﬀer-
             ence in how these functions can grow, you can take a moderate polynomial like
             x4 and a small exponential function like 2x . For small values of x (less than 16),
             the polynomial will be larger than the exponential. For slightly larger values of x,
             such as 20 or 30, the exponential will explode in size relative to the polynomial.
             Another redeeming feature of polynomials is that they are closed under composi-
             tion. This means that if you take a polynomial of a polynomial, you will still have
             a polynomial. Therefore, if a problem can be solved in a “reasonable” amount of
             time under one model of computation, it can be solved in a “reasonable” amount of
             time with any of the other models. If the problem takes exponential time to solve,
             then it really isn’t all that solvable to begin with, and taking a polynomial of an
             exponential makes it marginally worse. Thus, relatively speaking, all of the models
             of computation are roughly equivalent in speed. Nevertheless, if you try to use the
             Stutter exponentiation function, you’ll be in for a long wait, so these facts should
             be taken with a grain of salt.


3.5 Universal Computation and Decision Problems
             One of the nice things about Lisp and Stutter is that function definitions are also
             lists. This property not only is cosmetically appealing but also lends the languages
             a certain degree of power, in that functions can operate on function definitions very
             easily. For example, in Stutter (or Lisp) one could theoretically write a Stutter pro-
             gram with only about a hundred lines of code that is actually a Stutter interpreter
             running on top of the original Stutter interpreter. You may have seen commer-
             cial software that allows one type of computer to run software from another type.
             Such programs are known as emulators, and they are normally very complicated.
             Moreover, to write a program on a computer that emulates the computer that the
             program is running on is normally very diﬃcult. But Stutter’s simple and compact
41   Computability and Incomputability




                   • Input x and y.
                   • If x = 0, then output 0 and halt.
                   • If y = 0, then output 1 and halt.
                   • (We can assume that x ≥ 1 and y ≥ 1.)
                   • Set h to 1.
                   • Repeat until xy < h is true.
                            • Set l to h.
                            • Set h to 2 ∗ h.
                   • (We now know that xy is between l and h.)
                   • Set m to (h + l)/2.
                   • Repeat until xy < m is false and xy < m + 1 is true.
                            • If xy < m is true, then set h to m.
                            • If xy < m is false, then set l to m.
                            • Set m to (h + l)/2.
                   • Output m.



                   Table 3.4    An algorithm that computes xy from queries.


     representation makes doing the same thing under Stutter relatively easy. However,
     having a universal computer emulate itself is always possible, no matter what the
     underlying model of computation is.
        Recall that we were able to reduce any program’s input into a single natural
     number via Gödelization. Using the same technique as before, it is possible to
     represent all of the Stutter primitive function names and punctuation characters
     as a list of integers. For example, we could represent car, cdr, cons, if, lambda,
     quote, set, ‘)’, and ‘(’ by the numbers 1 through 9. Any additional variables or
     atom names that we need for a program could be mapped into the numbers 10, 11,
     12, and so on. Now that the program is represented as a list of natural numbers,
     one could code the entire program into a single Gödel number.
        The important thing to realize is that any of our models of computation can con-
     vert a program representation into a Gödel number. Moreover, they also can invert
     the process to retrieve the original program. Combining the facts that computers
     can invert Gödel numbers and emulate themselves means that for any computational
     model there theoretically exists a very special program that takes two numbers as
     input and performs the following computation. The first number is interpreted as
     the Gödel number of a program, and the second number is interpreted as the Gödel
     number for the input that one would want to supply to the program represented by
     the first input number. This special program can emulate the Gödelized program
     on the Gödelized input as if the real program were being executed. Such a program
42           Computability and Incomputability



             is known as a universal computer, and I will use the notation U (x, y) to mean that
             “the universal computer is executed with the Gödel number x of some program on
             the Gödel number y as input.”
                 We are also used to thinking of programs as producing some sort of meaningful
             output. Yet it is possible to take any program and convert it to another program
             that performs a computation similar to that of the first but outputs only either a 1
             or a 0. The new program is referred to as solving a decision problem. Using decision
             problems will provide us with another mathematical shortcut later on, but for now
             let’s see what this idea really means.
                 Consider a program that takes two inputs, x and y (or a single Gödel number
             for the two inputs), and outputs xy . We could use this program to write another
             program that takes three inputs, x, y, and z, and outputs a 1 if xy < z and 0
             otherwise. Now suppose that you never really have access to the first program, and
             you are allowed to only use the second program. How would you find out what xy
             really is? Table 3.4 gives an algorithm that computes xy by querying the second
             program. The basic idea behind the algorithm is to perform what is known as a
             binary search. It works in two stages. In the first stage the algorithm figures out an
             upper bound for xy by doubling an estimate until the estimate exceeds xy . Since
             the previous estimate was less than xy , we can assume that xy must be between l
             (for low) and h (for high). In the second stage the algorithm computes a middle
             point, m, between l and h and checks to see which half of the range (l to h) xy is
             in. The value of l or h is updated to reflect the in which half xy was found, and the
             process is repeated until xy is finally isolated.
                 How significant is the extra overhead in computing xy in such a manner? Sur-
             prisingly, not very. As a worst case, exponentiation in Stutter takes O(2x ) time
             (where x is the input length). However, the binary search performs the exponenti-
             ation operation only log2 (x) times in the worst case, which is actually better than
             a polynomial. Therefore, computing an exponent via a decision problem is just as
             “hard” as the original exponentiation program but not significantly harder.
                 In general, any program can be converted into a similar program that solves a
             decision problem, that is, set membership determination for some predetermined
             set. Moreover, using the decision program instead of the original program increases
             the original complexity only by an amount polynomial in the original running time.
             Why would you want to compute something in such an awkward manner? You
             wouldn’t, but theoretically this gives us a simplification in how computers work
             that we will exploit in the next section.


3.6 Incomputability
             Do there exist problems that are unsolvable by any computer? “Unsolvable” should
             be understood in the strictest sense of the word; that is, if all of the computers in
             the world worked in conjunction on one specific problem and they theoretically re-
43   Computability and Incomputability



                                                Natural Numbers
               Subsets              1      2      3      4   5             6        ···
               Even Numbers        no     yes    no    yes  no            yes       ···
               Odd Numbers         yes    no     yes    no  yes           no        ···
               Primes              no     yes    yes    no  yes           no        ···
               Squares             yes    no     no    yes  no            no        ···
               Powers of 2         yes    yes    no    yes  no            no        ···
               Multiples of 3      no     no     yes    no  no            yes       ···
                     ..             ..     ..     ..     ..  ..            ..       ..
                      .              .      .      .      .   .             .          .
               Diagonal Set        yes    yes    no     no  yes           no        ···


                  Table 3.5     Listing out simple sets to derive a diagonal set.


     quired a billion times the age of the universe to finally compute the correct answer,
     we would still consider such a problem “solvable.” This definition may seem un-
     reasonable, but the fact is that there are many problems that can’t be solved even
     with such loose criteria.
        Recall once again that every program can be reduced to another program that
     computes set membership. Some computable sets for sophisticated programs are
     very complex, but others should be familiar to all of us. Listed in Table 3.5 are
     some simple sets with the membership for a particular number being given in the
     entries.
        Since the number of programs and computable sets is countable, we can enu-
     merate all of the computable sets (or programs) in one long list, just as we did with
     the natural numbers in Chapter 2. Once again, the entries along the diagonal are
     boxed for emphasis. With the diagonal entries we can construct a diagonal set such
     that each member of that set is exactly opposite the entry in the main diagonal.
     Amazingly, the full infinite set represented by the complement of the diagonal is not
     computable because it diﬀers by at least one entry from every computable set; thus
     no computer program could ever exist that could tell you for any natural number
     whether it was a member or not. Our diagonal set is a nice illustration and serves
     as an existence proof, but it really doesn’t tell us what a truly impossible problem
     looks like.
        Alan Turing was the first to demonstrate that there are many problems that are
     not computable. For the rest of this section, we will concentrate on a single note-
     worthy incomputable problem that Turing discovered. Suppose you had a program
     and some data that you wanted to run the program on. A reasonable question to
     ask is: Will the program ever halt with a solution? Let’s assume that the program
     you want to check looks for the solution to a problem and halts only when it finds
     one. Therefore, the program may not ever stop if a solution doesn’t exist (or if
44   Computability and Incomputability



     it is simply too dumb to find one). Wouldn’t it be nice if there existed a special
     program that could tell us if another program would not halt? We could save a lot
     of time by seeing if the program we are really interested in would halt, and only
     then would we go to the next step of running it to find the solution. If such a
     program existed, programmers could use it to see if other programs had bugs in
     them that caused infinite loops. You could also use this special program on your
     home computer’s operating system (which is just another program) to eliminate
     those annoying software crashes.
         Let’s assume that this special program exists. We will denote an instance of
     this program by the notation M (x, y), where x is the Gödel number of the program
     that we wish to check and y is the Gödel number of the input that we want to
     feed to program x. Note that this is very similar to the universal computer that
     we constructed in the last section, but instead of producing the normal output of
     program x on y, it outputs
                                     #
                                        1 if U (x, y) halts
                          M (x, y) =                                .
                                        0 if U (x, y) does not halt

     If the program M (x, y) exists, then we can easily construct another program, M ′ (x),
     based on it that gives the output
                          #
                   ′         runs forever in an infinite loop if M (x, x) = 1
                 M (x) =                                                      .
                             halts with any output if M (x, x) = 0

         Don’t be bothered by the fact that we have purposely designed M ′ so that it
     can conceivably run forever (that is, diverge). Doing so is actually quite easy;
     for example, the Stutter function defined by (set ’f (lambda () (f))) will run
     forever if called. Since M ′ is just another program, it has its own unique Gödel
     number, which we will call m′ . Let’s see what happens if we try to run M ′ (x) with
     an input of m′ . What do you think will happen? Will it halt or run forever?
         Let’s assume for a moment that M ′ (m′ ) halts. If this is so, we know that
     M (m′ , m′ ) = 0 must be true. This means that program m′ with input m′ runs
     forever, which contradicts our original assumption that M ′ (m′ ) halts. Similarly,
     assuming that M ′ (m′ ) runs forever, we can conclude that M (m′ , m′ ) = 1, which
     further implies that program m′ on input m′ halts. Again, a contradiction! We are
     faced with contradictions no matter what assumption we make because the original
     program, M (x, y), simply cannot exist since it pretends to solve an unsolvable
     problem.
         Notice that the real diﬃculty in constructing a program similar to M (x, y) is in
     determining when a program fails to halt. If a program will halt, then plugging the
     program and input into the universal computer will tell us this is the case because
     the universal computer will also halt. Determining if a program will not halt is
     impossible because you would have to wait forever to see that it did not halt.
45           Computability and Incomputability



                 One tantalizing facet of our proof above is that it relies on running the program
             M ′ on its own Gödel number, m′ . Think about this: We are feeding a program itself
             as input. In other words, the program is examining itself and trying to perform some
             sort of self-analysis: Do I halt—or not? “Know thyself” seems to be an impossible
             command for a computer program. If a model of computation is so weak that it
             cannot ask questions about programs, then it will skirt the abyss, but at the cost of
             being too stupid to solve interesting problems. Once a model of computation has
             the ability to look within itself, it pays the price of not being able to halt under the
             right (or wrong) set of circumstances.


3.7 Number Sets Revisited
             Let’s put a few of the ideas from the last two sections together. Since every program
             has a unique Gödel number, let’s think about what those numbers look like. Ob-
             viously they will be very large numbers. Moreover, not every natural number will
             represent a legal program; for example, we could compute a Gödel number for the
             character sequence (xy))(z’’(), but such a string of characters does not represent
             a legal Stutter program because it violates the syntax of the language. However,
             syntax checking is not too diﬃcult a problem, so it would be theoretically possible
             to write a program that takes a single natural number as input and decides if it
             represents a Gödelization of a legal program. With this program, we could write
             another program that also takes a single natural number, x, as input, but this time
             the new program will output the xth Gödel number that represents a legal Stutter
             program.
                 This new program maps the natural numbers to programs, just as we did in
             Chapter 2 with simpler sets. Since we now know how to do a one-to-one mapping of
             natural numbers to programs, consider the set of numbers that map to a program
             that halts. This set is known as the halting set and has the property that it is
             recursively enumerable (RE for short) but not computable.
                 A recursive set is a set of numbers such that some program can decide if a
             number is a member or not. Recursive sets obviously can be finite in size, since a
             program to decide set membership for a finite set can always be written as a simple
             lookup table. There are also recursive sets that are infinite in size, such as the
             set of even numbers, or primes, or the infinite set of numbers that represent the
             Gödelization of three numbers, x, y, and z, such that xy < z is true.
                 The really important attribute that recursive sets have is that a program can
             determine if a number is or is not a member. On the other hand, for strictly RE
             sets (i.e., a set that is RE but not recursive) a program can decide only if a number
             is a member of the set. If a number is not a member of an RE set, there is no
             general way of determining that this is the case.
                 Since for every strictly RE set there is a program that halts only if its input
             is a member of the RE set, there are as many RE sets as programs (and natural
46   Computability and Incomputability



     numbers); that is, there is a countably infinite number of RE sets. There is a
     close relationship between RE sets and the computable irrational numbers. Recall
     from Chapter 2 that two examples of irrational computable numbers are π and
     √
       2. These numbers are called “computable” because you can write a program that
     enumerates each digit, one after the other. All modern operating systems have the
     ability to multitask, which gives the impression that the computer is running many
     programs simultaneously. All of our formal models of computation are also capable
     of emulating an arbitrary number of “virtual” computers. With such a scheme, it is
     possible for a master program to spawn another virtual program that checks the set
     membership of one particular number. At a future time step, the master program
     can spawn another virtual program that checks a second potential member, and so
     on. If any of these virtual programs ever halts with the answer “yes, this element
     is a member of the RE set we are considering,” then the master program can halt
     that particular virtual program. A virtual program may never halt with an answer
     of “no” but instead just keeps running forever. Thus, it is theoretically possible for
     one program to continuously spit out members of an RE set, which is why we say it
     is recursively enumerable. The master program will never halt, but there also will
     never be a last element that it gives a positive membership classification to. This
     master program is similar to a program that would continuously print out digits of
     π. The π program also will never halt (unless we explicitly tell it to halt at some
     future time), but always produce another digit, and another, and so on. The main
     diﬀerence between computable numbers and RE sets in this analogy is that we can’t
     compute the nth member of an RE set the way we can compute the nth digit of π,
     but it is still interesting to see that both RE sets and computable numbers can, in
     a sense, be perfectly described by an algorithm.
         Things get really strange when you start to think about sets that are not re-
     cursively enumerable, or “NOT-RE.” To start, let’s consider a set that is the
     complement of an RE set that is not recursive. The complement of a set consists
     of all numbers that are not in the original set. We will give the label “CO-RE” to
     sets that are constructed in this manner. The complement of the halting set is an
     example of a CO-RE set. We can think of CO-RE sets as being special cases of the
     more general NOT-RE set type.
         Just as for RE sets, for a CO-RE set you could never write a program that
     would halt if and only if the input was a member of the CO-RE set. However,
     in many ways CO-RE sets are more pathological than RE sets because we cannot
     even determine in a general way if some number is a member. We can answer only
     the opposite question with any degree of reliability: Is this number not a member?
     This is reminiscent of trying to draw a picture only by filling in the background—we
     are not allowed to draw the foreground but can only infer things about it based on
     what we see in the background. I like to think of CO-RE sets as the “black holes”
     of recursive mathematics because of this property.
         Yet, there are sets that are NOT-RE and also are not CO-RE. What could
     this possibly mean? Such a set defies algorithmic description, meaning that no
47   Computability and Incomputability




                                        Not RE
                                    and Not CO-RE
                                         Sets



                                  RE         Recursive        CO-RE
                                 Sets           Sets          Sets




                                Algorithmically Indescribable Objects




                         Figure 3.1      Subdivision of numbers and sets



     program could tell you anything at all about a potential member with any certainty.
     The truly disturbing thing about such sets is that there is an uncountably infinite
     number of them—more than the recursive, RE, and CO-RE combined. These sets
     are analogous to the uncomputable irrational numbers. You can imagine that the
     digit expansion of an uncomputable irrational number is eﬀectively random because
     there is no consistent relationship between any of the digits. (We will talk more
     about such random numbers in Chapter 9.)
        Figure 3.1 gives a stylized representation of numbers and sets, and specific exam-
     ples of these diﬀerent set types are given in Table 3.6. Recursive sets are a special
     case because their complements are also recursive. Recursive sets are trivially RE as
     well. Sets that are not recursive but are RE are found in the large light-gray section
     on the left of Figure 3.1. The NOT-RE sets that are also CO-RE are in the darkest
     nonblack section. The black section contains the uncountably infinite NOT-RE sets
     that are “very” NOT-RE, in that their complements are also NOT-RE. You can
     view the lightest regions of the figure as denoting the most “knowable” sets. In the
     darker regions the sets under consideration become more and more “unknowable.”
48               Computability and Incomputability



                      Set Type       Example
               Recursive (finite)    1, 2, and 3
             Recursive (infinite)    all even numbers
           RE but not Recursive      the Gödel numbers of all programs that halt
        CO-RE but not Recursive      the Gödel numbers of all programs that never halt
                       NOT-RE        a CO-RE set that is not recursive or a “random” set
                   NOT-CO-RE         an RE set that is not recursive or a “random” set
          Recursive Subset of an     the Gödel numbers of all programs that provably halt
        RE but not Recursive Set
           Recursive Subset of a     the Gödel numbers of all programs that provably never halt
     CO-RE but not Recursive Set
      NOT-RE and NOT-CO-RE           “random” and beyond algorithmic description


                                     Table 3.6   Examples of diﬀerent types of sets


                     If you are still bothered by the fact that some infinities are larger than others,
                 then I have some bad news for you: It gets worse. Recall that Georg Cantor
                 was the first to realize that there is a diﬀerence between countable infinity and
                 uncountable infinity. Cantor also discovered power sets, which is another way of
                 deriving the diﬀerences in the infinities. A power set of another set, A, is the
                 set of all subsets of A. For example, if A = {1, 2, 3}, then the power set of A
                 is {{}, {1}, {2}, {3}, {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {2, 3}, {1, 2, 3}} . Notice that we include the
                 original set and the empty set. If A has n members, then its power set will have 2n
                 members. The set of all natural numbers has a power set. There is also a power set
                 of the power set of all of the natural numbers. The sizes, or cardinalities, of each
                 successive power set are known as the transfinite numbers, with the size of the set
                 of natural numbers being the first transfinite number. It is regarded as true but not
                 provable that the second transfinite number is equal to the cardinality of the real
                 numbers. What is really astounding is that there is an infinite number of transfinite
                 numbers.


3.8 Further Reading
                  Abelson, H., Sussman, G. J., & Sussman, J. (1996). Structure and interpretation
                  of computer programs. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
                  Dewdney, A. K. (1989). The Turing omnibus: 61 excursions in computer science.
                  Rockville, Md.: Computer Science Press.
                  Gödel, K. (1986). On completeness and consistency. In S. Feferman, J. W. Dawson,
                  Jr., S. C. Kleene, G. H. Moore, R. M. Solovay, & J. Van Heijenoort (Eds.), Kurt
                  Gödel: Collected works, volume 1 (pp. 235–237). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
49   Computability and Incomputability



      Goldstine, H. H. (1993). The computer from Pascal to von Neumann. Princeton:
      Princeton University Press.
      Hodges, A. (1983). Alan Turing: The enigma. New York: Simon and Schuster.
      Hopcroft, J. E. & Ullman, J. D. (1979). Introduction to automata theory, languages,
      and computation. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
      McCarthy, J. (1960). LISP 1 programmer’s manual. Technical report, Computa-
      tion Center and Research Laboratory of Electronics, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
      Minsky, M. (1972). Computation: Finite and infinite machines. London: Prentice-
      Hall.
      Ribenboim, P. (1991). The little book of big primes. New York: Springer-Verlag.
      Turing, A. M. (1936). On computable numbers, with an application to the
      Entscheidungsproblem. Proc. London Math. Soc., 2(42): 230–265.
      Turing, A. M. (1950). Can a machine think? Mind, 59(236): 433–460.
      Wang, H. (1987). Reflections on Kurt Gödel. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
4   Postscript: Computation




                                                                          All Cretans are liars.
                                                        — Epimenides, who was himself a Cretan


                                   Trying to define yourself is like trying to bite your own teeth.
                                                                                     — Alan Watts




    In the last chapter I hinted at a mathematical result due to Gödel that shocked 1

    many of his contemporaries. To put Gödel’s research in the proper context, we
    should probably take a look at what other researchers were doing in the early part
    of the twentieth century. Mathematicians such as Bertrand Russell, Alfred North
    Whitehead, and David Hilbert were expending a great deal of eﬀort in trying to
    construct a mathematical formalism that was consistent in the sense that all math-
    ematical statements could be safely classified as being true or false, and complete
    in the sense that all true statements could be proven true and all false statements
    could be proven false. This seemed at the time to be a reasonable goal; however, all
    attempts to show that mathematics could be made “complete” failed. Philosophi-
    cally, if logic and arithmetic were inconsistent, then they would be almost useless
    as tools for inferring facts about the universe. Not only would profound things be
    diﬃcult to analyze with a broken logic, but simple statements such as “1 + 1 = 2”
    would be in question. On the other hand, if logic and arithmetic were incomplete,
    then there would be mathematical truths that could never be identified as being
    true. Both possibilities hold little attraction for mathematicians; thus, Gödel’s
    contemporaries were extremely shocked when Gödel proved that any suﬃciently
    powerful mathematical formalism that is consistent must also be incomplete.
        In this first postscript chapter we will examine Gödel’s incompleteness in the
    context of Turing’s result on incomputability and see how both results relate to an
       1 Unrelated to the contents of this chapter, but interesting nonetheless, Kurt Gödel, like Alan

    Turing, died under strange and ironic circumstances. In 1978 Gödel was working at Princeton Uni-
    versity’s Institute for Advanced Study. Quite simply, one of the century’s greatest minds starved
    himself to death because he suspected that someone was trying to poison him (Wang, 1987).
52            Postscript: Computation



              inherent paradoxical quality found in any formalism, including language, hypothet-
              ical super-analog computers, and real physical systems. This unavoidable paradox
              has implications for any natural computational system, including all of the topics
              covered in Parts II-V.


4.1 Gödel’s Incompleteness Result
              Initially, Gödel set out to prove that first-order predicate calculus with arithmetic
              was complete. Predicate calculus has a very simple and compact form that makes
              it easy to use and analyze. In predicate calculus one is allowed to make statements
              about numbers with the basic arithmetic operations (the general recursive function
              rules from Chapter 3 would suﬃce), logical operations (AND, OR, and NOT), and
              the universal and existential quantifiers (“For all numbers x . . .” and “There exists
              a number x . . .”). Predicate calculus also has a few axioms and inference rules built
              into it to allow one to construct new mathematical statements from old ones.
                  Clearly, since predicate calculus with arithmetic only makes statements about
              numbers, each statement is either true or false, so let’s agree for the moment that
              predicate calculus is consistent. Would it be possible to prove that predicate calculus
              is complete as well? What Gödel did was essentially construct a mathematical
              statement that almost (but not quite) read “This statement has no proof.” This
              is a lot like Epimenides’s assertion quoted in the beginning of this chapter, or the
              Liar’s Paradox “This sentence is false.” The diﬀerence between Gödel’s statement
              and these more familiar paradoxes is that while the statement “This sentence is
              false” obviously leads to a paradox, Gödel’s statement is undoubtedly true.
                  Let’s examine Gödel’s statement a bit more closely to see why it must be true.
              The first thing we must realize is that all statements in predicate calculus have a
              unique Gödel number. We will use the notation Sy to mean that S is a statement
              that can be coded by the Gödel number y. Also note that a formal proof (which
              is just a sequence of statements) can also be Gödelized, so let Px mean that P is a
              proof with Gödel number x.
                  Verifying that a proof is correct can be broken down into a mechanical procedure
              where the proof checker simply verifies that each statement can be derived from
              some previous statement by the application of a known axiom or theorem. Thus,
              the notion that a proof exists can be mathematically formalized. In fact, it is
              possible to construct a very general predicate calculus statement, Proof(x, y, z),
              which has three free variables and reads “Px is a proof for the statement Sy (z)
              that makes an assertion about the number z.” With this last statement, we can
              formalize an assertion that a proof for something does not exist. We can also
              play with the free variables a bit to construct a statement that is in some ways
              self-referential: ¬∃xProof(x, y, y). The ¬ symbol denotes logical negation and the ∃
              symbol denotes the existential quantifier and reads as “there exists.” Therefore, the
53           Postscript: Computation



             statement ¬∃xProof(x, y, y) reads “There does not exist any proof for the statement
             Sy (y).” Notice that ¬∃xProof(x, y, y) asserts something about a statement that
             asserts something about its own Gödel number. Since ¬∃xProof(x, y, y) is a formal
             statement, it has its own Gödel number, which we will denote by g. Finally, this
             brings us to the following statement:
                                    Gödel’s Statement: ¬∃xProof(x, g, g)
             Is Gödel’s statement true or false? If predicate calculus is consistent, then all
             statements, including Gödel’s statement, must be one or the other. If predicate
             calculus is complete, then either Gödel’s statement is provably true or its negation
             is. Gödel considered all of these issues and came up with the following remarkable
             theorem:
                Gödel’s Theorem:        ¬∃xProof(x, g, g) is a true statement in predicate cal-
                                         culus, but cannot be proven true in predicate calculus.
                 The proof for Gödel’s Theorem is actually very simple. Suppose that the the-
             orem was not true, and that there really existed a proof for ¬∃xProof(x, g, g). If
             ¬∃xProof(x, g, g) is provable, then it must also be a true statement (otherwise,
             predicate calculus would be inconsistent). If it is a true statement, then a proof for
             Gödel’s statement cannot exist. But this is in direct contradiction with our starting
             assumption that the proof exists. Therefore, since it cannot be false, it must be
             true.
                 There is one more remaining little nuance of Gödel’s Theorem that we will look
             at. Suppose a magical oracle tells you with absolute certainty that some formal
             statement, ¬∃xS(x), is neither provable nor disprovable. The oracle makes no claim
             as to the validity of the statement, only that you and I will never be able to prove
             it one way or the other. What can we deduce about the validity of ¬∃xS(x) based
             on what we now know? Assuming that S(x) is a simple statement that contains no
             additional quantifiers, if ¬∃xS(x) is false, then ∃xS(x) would be true. But if some
             x existed for which S(x) is true, then the statement ¬∃xS(x) would be provably
             false. Therefore, as long as S(x) has no additional quantifiers, statements of the
             form ¬∃xS(x) must always be true if they cannot be proved true or false.


4.2 Incompleteness versus Incomputability
             While Turing’s result on incomputability is concerned with the limitations of com-
             puters and Gödel’s result is concerned with the limitation of mathematics, Turing’s
             result is more general in that Gödel’s result is a special case of it. This is because the
             notion of proof verification can be automated by a computer since any of the math-
             ematical statements from the previous section can be implemented as programs.
             Therefore, asking the question “Is there a proof for a mathematical statement?”
             can always be reexpressed as “Does some program halt?”
54   Postscript: Computation



        Despite this fact, from a purely subjective and intuitive point of view, Gödel’s
     theorem seems to be more profound because it is primarily concerned with the
     limitations of mathematics and, by implication, the limitations of mathematicians
     as well as other humans. On the other hand, some mathematicians, most no-
     tably Roger Penrose in his best-selling book The Emperor’s New Mind , have taken
     Gödel’s incompleteness result to be evidence that human minds do something that
     no computer could ever do. To paraphrase, the argument works something like this:

          Looking at Gödel’s statement, we know that it must undoubtedly be
          true, since if it is false, we reach a contradiction. You and I, being hu-
          mans, were able to “leap” out of the formal mathematics to see the valid-
          ity of Gödel’s statement. This ability to see beyond mathematics demon-
          strates that in some ways, human thought is not only non-algorithmic,
          but also intrinsically more powerful than algorithmic processes.

        Many scientists, philosophers, and mathematicians have pointed out that there
     are at least two problems with Penrose’s interpretation of Gödel’s incompleteness
     result. First, while Gödel’s incompleteness result certainly implies that there are
     true mathematical statements that cannot be proven true—with ¬∃xProof(x, g, g)
     being just one example—it does not necessarily follow that a computer cannot
     “see” the validity of a Gödel statement with any less certainty than we could.
     Why? Because, within predicate calculus, neither you nor I (nor anyone else) would
     be able to prove a Gödel statement. “Seeing” truth is not the same as proving
     truth. Nevertheless, Gödel did prove that the Gödel statement was true, but not in
     predicate calculus. His proof was in a formal system of mathematics that was slightly
     more powerful than the system he started out with. Let’s denote the original system,
     predicate calculus, by the symbol P , and the system in which Gödel proved his
     incompleteness result by the symbol P ′ . Is P ′ immune to Gödel’s incompleteness?
     Surprisingly, P ′ is also incomplete. We can prove this by using another formal
     system, P ′′ , which is also incomplete (but provably so in P ′′′ ), and so on.
        The second problem with the argument is that Penrose assumes that humans
     are both complete and consistent. If humans were somehow immune to Gödel’s
     incompleteness, then (as computational systems) we would have to be either in-
     consistent or so computationally weak that self-referential statements could not be
     expressed. Either of these results would imply that humans are, at least in some
     ways, weaker than computers. But even if humans are consistent, we aren’t immune
     to Gödel’s incompleteness. This is illustrated by the following humorous scenario,
     which I quote, with some minor editing, from Peter Grogono:2

          Imagine that we have an instrument with which we can examine Pen-
          rose’s brain in great detail (a sort of souped-up interactive NMR scanner,
       2 From a posting on the USENET newsgroup comp.ai.alife, dated September 29, 1995.
55           Postscript: Computation



                  perhaps). After some investigation, we find a neuron, G, with the fol-
                  lowing property: G is usually dormant, but if we tell Penrose that G is
                  dormant, G promptly fires. Then there is a true fact (G is dormant)
                  that Penrose can never know because, whenever he knows it, it is false.
                  Furthermore, we can know this because we are “outside the system.”

                  It is unlikely that a neuron with this property exists. It is very likely,
                  however, that there are some aspects of Penrose’s brain’s behavior that
                  he cannot know, because knowing them would render them false. Thus
                  Penrose is not exempt from Gödel’s theorem.

                Furthermore, consider the sentence “Penrose cannot truthfully assert this state-
             ment.” You and I can say this sentence without contradicting ourselves. But no
             matter how Penrose contorts himself, he cannot say the sentence without being
             inconsistent. Moreover, Penrose can “see” the validity of the statement, but he is
             helpless to express it truthfully, unlike us, because we are “outside” of the system
             that is Penrose.


4.3 Discrete versus Continuous
             Another interesting line of thought that could possibly imply that the universe can-
             not be understood in terms of computational processes involves the notion that since
             the universe is obviously continuous, computers—which can represent only discrete
             entities by definition—are incapable of accurately representing what happens in the
             universe. If it turned out that the universe is in fact continuous, then it would seem
             very unlikely that computational processes tell the full story of how nature works.
                 To counter this, we must first examine the premise, namely, that the universe
             is obviously continuous. Counter to most people’s intuition, it is not at all clear
             whether or not the universe is continuous. Our everyday experiences seem to indi-
             cate that the universe—at least on the macroscopic scale that we are used to—obeys
             the laws of continuous mathematics; however, physics at infinitesimal scales seems
             to indicate that the universe is spatially or temporally discrete. Moreover, there
             would certainly be a precedent for natural phenomena being discrete, since many
             subatomic particles are indivisible and represent a discrete amount of energy or
             mass.
                 Despite this fact, let’s examine what it means to compute on a continuous level.
             Lenore Blum, Mike Shub, and Steven Smale have formulated a model of compu-
             tation that operates over real numbers. This model of computation exists only in
             theory, and will never be physically realizable, since it depends on a perfect repre-
             sentation for real numbers (that is, storing an irrational number’s infinite decimal
             expansion). Nevertheless, let’s pretend for the moment that you could build a ma-
             chine that corresponded to this formal model of computation over the real numbers.
56           Postscript: Computation



             The remarkable thing about such a device is that theoretically there exists a “pro-
             gram” for this machine that would be able to solve the Halting Problem for discrete
             computers. The way the program would work would be essentially to have the un-
             computable real number that corresponded to the halting set as some constant in
             the program.
                Does this mean that the Halting Problem would be solved if this device existed?
             Interestingly, if one continues the analysis of this model of computation (it is a bit
             too complicated to get into in this short chapter), it turns out that it has its own
             halting set. In other words, it would seem that there really is no such thing as a free
             lunch, since even this hypothetical computer has its own infinite set of problems
             that are incomputable.
                The moral of the story is that Gödel’s incompleteness result applies to all math-
             ematical formalisms that are so complicated they can make statements about math-
             ematics. Thus, no suﬃciently complicated (or interesting) model of computation
             will ever be free of these basic limitations.


4.4 Incomputability versus Computability
             Much of the confusion surrounding the issue if how closely nature can be approxi-
             mated in a computational framework seems to revolve around the terms computable
             and incomputable. There are two shades of meaning for the terms that are often
             confused. In the formal sense, that is, how a computer scientist would use the
             words, the term computable / incomputable is used to indicate that a program will
             halt / will not halt, respectively. But in the weaker sense, people often use the two
             terms to mean something can (or cannot) be simulated for an arbitrary length of
             time. For example, given three objects—say a star, a planet, and a satellite—it
             has been proved that it is impossible, in the general case, to analytically determine
             the future position of the three objects.3 So in the strict sense, the Three Body
             Problem is incomputable. But in the weaker sense of the words, it can be simulated
             on a computer with very good accuracy—enough to put a man on the moon, in
             fact.
                 This confusion has been used by some people to make a claim that physical
             systems do things that are intrinsically beyond the capabilities of computers. At the
             risk of picking on Penrose, I am once again going to use an example from his book.
             Penrose cites a theoretical “billiard-ball” computer, introduced by Edward Fredkin
             and Tommaso Toﬀoli (1982), that is capable of computation through a series of
             billiard-ball switches that operate on a principle similar to the way digital circuitry
             works in a computer. Fortunately for the purposes of this discussion, it is not really
             necessary for us to go into the details of how the billiard-ball computer actually
                3 This is the well-known Three Body Problem, proved unsolvable by Henri Poincaré, which

             forshadowed the importance of chaos.
57           Postscript: Computation



             works. We just need to appreciate that it is a deterministic system that behaves
             similarly to a real-world physical system. In fact, the billiard-ball computer is also
             capable of universal computation, which means that no digital computer could ever
             determine if the billiard-ball computer would “halt” for an arbitrary configuration.
             Does this mean that physical systems operate in a manner that is qualitatively more
             advanced than a computer?
                 Penrose is absolutely correct to point out that the billiard-ball computer is in-
             computable in the strong sense of the word. But it is “computable” in the weak
             sense of the word because we could simulate it to any degree of accuracy that we
             wished. If, for some initial configuration, the billiard-ball computer failed to “halt,”
             then our own computer simulation of it would also fail to halt. But if it did reach
             some final state, so would the simulation of it.
                 Here is the point. Nature is so rich and complex in its behavior that computers
             are incapable of answering many questions about the future. The only way to
             come close is to simulate a natural system at the risk that a program may never
             halt. But this richness goes both ways. Computer programs exist that are so
             complex that their future cannot be predicted either by another computer or by a
             natural system. Nothing that we know about nature indicates that it stands a level
             above computational processes. Moreover, Turing’s and Gödel’s results are really a
             strength and not a weakness. How so? These sorts of paradoxes are possible only in
             systems that are strong enough to refer to themselves. Computers obviously fall into
             this category. But natural systems with a built-in form of parallelism and feedback
             have much of this same strength. In Parts II–V we will see how this computational
             paradox is really a sort of power, since all of the subjects that we will examine have
             a richness that is directly related to incomputability.


4.5 Further Reading
              Casti, J. L. (1994). Complexification: Explaining a paradoxical world through the
              science of surprise. New York: HarperCollins.

              Fredkin, E. & Toﬀoli, T. (1982). Conservative logic. Int. J. Theor. Phys., 21(3–4):
              219–253.

              Gödel, K. (1965). On intuitionistic arithmetic and number theory. In M. Davis
              (Ed.), The undecidable (pp. 75–81). New York: Raven Press.

              Gödel, K. (1986). On completeness and consistency. In S. Feferman, J. W. Dawson,
              Jr., S. C. Kleene, G. H. Moore, R. M. Solovay, & J. Van Heijenoort (Eds.), Kurt
              Gödel: Collected works, volume 1 (pp. 235–237). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

              Hofstadter, D. R. (1979). Gödel, Escher, Bach: An eternal golden braid. New
              York: Basic Books.
58   Postscript: Computation



      Margolus, N. (1984). Physics-like models of computation. Physica D, 10(1–2):
      81–95.
      Penrose, R. (1989). The emperor’s new mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Wang, H. (1987). Reflections on Kurt Gödel. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
      Whitehead, A. N. & Russell, B. (1910). Principia mathematica. Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press.
II   Fractals


     Euclidean geometry can be extended to account for objects with a fractional di-
     mension. Such objects, known as fractals, come very close to capturing the richness
     and variety of forms found in nature. Fractals possess structural self-similarity on
     multiple spatial scales, meaning that a piece of a fractal will often look like the
     whole. Related to this property is the fact that fractals are extremely compressible
     in the sense that an algorithm or recipe for the image is far simpler to store than
     the image itself. This is due to the recursive and/or iterative nature of the fractal
     algorithm. But since fractals are so closely tied to algorithms, some fractals have
     the same paradoxical properties as systems that can compute.
        Chapter 5 introduces some of the basic ideas behind fractal geometry by consid-
     ering some unusual geometric objects as well as some common stochastic processes
     found in nature. Chapter 6 focuses on L-systems, which are simple program frag-
     ments that can define plantlike and other fractals. Chapter 7 considers fractals that
     can be defined by linear algebra operators, and Chapter 8 focuses on two special
     types of nonlinear fractals. This part is concluded by Chapter 9, which examines
     how fractals can be seen as “nearly simple” objects by some candidate measures of
     complexity.
5   Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry




                                                              So, Na’ralist observe, A Flea
                                                      Hath smaller fleas that on him prey,
                                                   And these have smaller fleas to bite ’em
                                                             And so proceed ad infinitum.
                                                                        — Jonathan Swift


                                                     There is no “royal road” to geometry.
                                                              — Euclid to King Ptolemy I


                                      God used beautiful mathematics in creating the world.
                                                                             — Paul Dirac




    M     ost man-made objects are geometrically simple in that they resemble idealized
    forms such as points, lines, planes, cubes, circles, or spheres. Ever since Euclid
    invented geometry, people have been content with the idea that everyday objects
    can be classified as compositions of regular geometric shapes. Sometimes using
    simple geometry seems to work; for example, this book in your hand is roughly
    rectangular, and most people would rightly conclude that attempting to classify
    the shape by any other means would be silly. But what about natural objects
    such as a tree, a snowflake, or a mountain range? Do these objects easily fit into a
    simple geometric category? While it is clear that the idealized geometric shapes only
    grossly approximate these common natural structures, for some reason conventional
    wisdom has dictated that such objects are somehow exceptions to the rule; hence,
    as the reasoning goes, we should not be bothered by the fact that not everything
    can be described by simple lines and curves.
        The term fractal was coined by Benoit Mandelbrot to diﬀerentiate pure geomet-
    ric figures from other types of figures that defy such simple classification. Fractals
    have two interesting qualities that will be explored in this chapter. First, fractals
    are self-similar on multiple scales, in that a small portion of a fractal will often
62          Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry




                        Figure 5.1    The first few steps in constructing the Cantor set


            look similar to the whole object, much as a fern leaf looks very much like a fern
            tree. Second, fractals have a fractional dimension, as opposed to an integer dimen-
            sion that idealized objects have. This characteristic means that a fractal with a
            dimension of 1.5 is in some way more than a line but less than a plane.
               Because fractals are self-similar, all fractals have a built-in form of recursion.
            Sometimes the recursion is explicitly visible in how the fractal is constructed. Other
            times the recursion is a little more subtle and may be an artifact of an underlying
            fractal-building process that occurs on multiple spatial scales. The first type of
            fractal can typically be defined by a program-like specification, while the second
            type of fractal is usually related to a random or stochastic process. In this chapter,
            we will examine both types of fractals so as to better appreciate both the explicit
            and the implicit recursion they contain.


5.1 The Cantor Set
            Interestingly, the earliest discovered fractals predate the modern computer; were
            introduced by mathematicians such as Georg Cantor, Helge von Koch, and Waclaw
            Sierpinski (among others); and were presented as mathematical monsters because of
            some nonintuitive properties they possess that we will be examining in this chapter.
            These properties will be easier to understand with some concrete examples; thus,
            we begin once again with Georg Cantor and the Cantor set.
                To construct the Cantor set, we start with the line segment that exists on the
            interval [0, 1]. We then remove the middle third of the segment (leaving the end
            points) to form two new line segments that exist at [0, 31 ] and [ 23 , 1]. Next, we
            repeat the process of removing the middle third of each of the two line segments
            from the previous step to get four smaller line segments. The process of removing
            the middle third of each remaining line segment continues forever. We obviously
            cannot do this an infinite number of times with pencil and paper, but, in theory,
            if we did, we would end up with a image not unlike the bottom line of Figure 5.1,
            which shows the first few steps in our construction.
63                        Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry




     "
     0                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                "
                                                    "                                 "
                                                    1                                 2
                                                    3                                 3

                    "             "                                                                     "      "
                    1             2                                                                     7     8
                    9             9                                                                     9     9
          1    2                         7    8                                             19   20                 25   26
          "
         27   "
              27                         "
                                        27   "
                                             27                                              "
                                                                                            27   "
                                                                                                 27                  "
                                                                                                                    27   "
                                                                                                                         27




                                                        Figure 5.2   The Cantor set with points labeled


     "                                                                                                                          "
     0                                                                                                                        1

                                                    "
                                                  0.1
                                                                                      "
                                                                                     0.2

                    "
                   0.01
                                  "
                                0.02
                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                      0.21
                                                                                                               "
                                                                                                             0.22

          "   "
     0.001 0.002
                                         "   "
                                      0.021 0.022
                                                                                             "   "
                                                                                          0.201 0.202
                                                                                                                     "   "
                                                                                                                  0.221 0.222



                                       Figure 5.3          The Cantor set with points labeled in ternary notation


                              Let’s pretend that we are able to construct the full Cantor set. What points will
                          remain after an infinite number of steps? Whenever we remove the middle third
                          from a line segment, we keep the old end points and the newly formed end points.
                          Therefore, the end points that remain after any of the steps will always remain in
                          the picture and we can safely conclude that they are members of the Cantor set.
                          But are these the only points that are in the Cantor set?
                              Figure 5.2 once again illustrates the first few steps in constructing the Cantor
                          set, but this time the newly formed end points from each step are labeled. Notice
                          that we can enumerate the end points as they are discovered: 0, 1, 31 , 23 , 19 , 29 , 79 ,
                          8    1   2    7     8   19
                          9 , 27 , 27 , 27 , 27 , 27 , . . ., which means that we have discovered an algorithm that
                          maps Cantor set end points to natural numbers. We can refine the list of end points
                          by noting that each such point is the sum of perfect inverse powers of 3. This means
                          that the end points can be eﬃciently represented by ternary numbers.1
                              The value of a decimal number, such as 123.456, is computed as
                               123.456 = 1 × 102 + 2 × 101 + 3 × 100 + 4 × 10−1 + 5 × 10−2 + 6 × 10−3 .
                          Since decimal numbers have a base-10 representation,2 we are allowed to use only
                          the digits from 0 to 9. A ternary or base-3 number is similar to a decimal number
                             1 Readers familiar with binary numbers will be glad to know that ternary numbers are similar

                          to binary numbers except that a base of 3 is used instead of 2.
                             2 There is nothing magical about decimal or base-10 numbers. We find them comfortable to

                          use because most of us have ten fingers to count on. Since computers are good at representing
                          only “on” and “oﬀ” states, binary numbers are the most convenient representation for computers
                          because they have only two “fingers” to count on. Moreover, it is fair to say that any base is just
                          as “good” as any other, that is, base-10 is in no way intrinsically “better” than base-2 or base-3.
64   Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry



     except that instead of representing values as multiples of powers of 10, we use
     powers of 3. Moreover, when writing out a ternary number, we are allowed to
     use only the digits 0, 1, and 2. Thus, one could write the decimal number 17 as
     32 + 2 × 31 + 2 × 30 = 122. Fractions in ternary notation are handled similarly;
     thus, the decimal 13 is equal to ternary 0.1, since 13 = 3−1 .
        Going back to the Cantor set, we can revise Figure 5.2 into the form of Figure 5.3,
     which uses ternary notation instead of decimal fractions.
        Since the Cantor set is constructed by removing thirds, writing end points in
     ternary notation reveals a simpler numerical form for the end points. Notice that
     successive end points are now very easy to construct based on the previously com-
     puted end points.
        We will now see if we can come up with a generalized rule for determining if
     a given ternary number is a member of the Cantor set. Looking at the first third
     that is removed, (0.1, 0.2), we know that any ternary number strictly between these
     two end points is not in the Cantor set. Recall from Chapter 2 that decimal 1.0
     was equivalent to 0.9̄. In ternary notation we have the similar equivalence that
     0.1 equals 0.02̄. Therefore, any ternary number between 0.02̄ and 0.2 is not in the
     Cantor set. What do these numbers look like? If you play with these two numbers
     for a while, one thing becomes clear: All numbers strictly between 0.02̄ and 0.2
     must have a 1 somewhere in the middle of the digit sequence.
        Performing the same analysis on the end points 0.002̄ and 0.02, or 0.202̄ and
     0.22, leads us to the same conclusion. Thus, the points of the Cantor set are
     exactly those points that can be written without any 1s. How many such points
     are there? Clearly, the number of end points in the Cantor set is countably infinite
     because we can enumerate them. Moreover, we can observe that all end points have
     the property that in ternary notation they end either with an infinite number of 2s
     or with an infinite number of 0s (as 0.2 = 0.20̄). Of all of the ternary numbers that
     can be written without using a 1 the end points are in fact a small subset. There
     are many other points on the real number line that can be written without using
     the digit 1 but do not terminate with · · · 2̄ or · · · 0̄. One such example would be:

                    0.020022000222000022220000022222000000222222 · · ·.

     In fact, there is an uncountably infinite number of points in the Cantor set, which
     is to say there are as many points in the Cantor set as there are numbers in the
     real number line.
         Suppose we wished to measure the width of all the points in the Cantor set.
     Mathematicians refer to this as the measure of a set. Let us refer to the step in
     the Cantor set construction by the number n, with the original starting line being
     step n = 0. At any step, n, we have 2n candidate line segments, each of width 31n .
                                                                                    $ %n
     Therefore, at any step the measure of the remaining line segments is 2n × 31n = 32 .
     Thus, as n grows to infinity, the measure of the Cantor set diminishes to 0.
65            Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry




     Step 1                                          Step 2




     Step 3                                          Step 4



                          Figure 5.4   The first few steps in constructing the Koch curve


                 The fact that the Cantor set has as many points as the real number line but has
              zero measure was perplexing to most of Cantor’s contemporaries, and this counter-
              intuitive property was inspiration for other mathematicians to discover many more
              mathematical monsters, some of which we will sample shortly.


5.2 The Koch Curve
              The Koch curve was created by Helge von Koch as an example of a curve that has
              no tangent at any point. The first few steps in constructing the Koch curve are
              shown in Figure 5.4. The construction starts with a single straight line (which is
              not shown, and is understood to be unit length) and iteratively applies the following
              transformation: Take each line segment of the Koch curve from the previous step
              and remove the middle third. Replace the middle third with two new line segments,
              each with length equal to the removed part. The two new line segments are inserted
              into the curve such that had the removed piece been left in place, the three segments
              would form an equilateral triangle.
                 The method of construction is very easy to understand once Figure 5.4 is ex-
              amined closely. If one could repeat the process forever, the final Koch curve would
              consist of no line segments at all but instead would have a corner coincident on
              every point in the curve. In other words, the curve consists entirely of corners.
              This is the gist of the earlier statement concerning the fact that the Koch curve has
              no tangent anywhere, and it is why many have characterized the Koch curve as a
              mathematical monster.
                 The Koch curve is obviously related to the Cantor set because they both rely on
              removing the middle third segment in their respective constructions. After applying
66          Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry



               Step    Number of Segments          Length of a Segment         Total Length
               0       1                           1                           1
               1       4                           0.333333                    1.33333
               2       16                          0.111111                    1.77778
               3       64                          0.037037                    2.37037
               4       256                         0.0123457                   3.16049
               5       1024                        0.00411523                  4.21399
               6       4096                        0.00137174                  5.61866
               7       16384                       0.000457247                 7.49154
               8       65536                       0.000152416                 9.98872
               9       262144                      5.08053 × 10−5              13.3183
               10      1.04858 × 106               1.69351 × 10−5              17.7577
               ..      ..                          ..                          ..
                .       .                           .                           .
               100     1.60694 × 1060              1.94033 × 10−48             3.11798 × 1012


                                  Table 5.1    The length of the Koch curve


            an infinite number of steps in the Koch curve’s construction, the points that remain
            on the original line segment are exactly the same points that are in the Cantor set
            after an infinite number of steps.
                The most interesting facet of the Koch curve is found when one tries to compute
            its length. We can compute the length of the Koch curve at any step by noting that
            at step n, the curve consists of 4n line segments, each with length 1/3n . The total
                                               n
            length is therefore equal to (4/3) . A list of these values for some reasonably small
            step sizes is shown in Table 5.1.
                Looking at the total length for step 100, we see the value 3.11798×1012. Suppose
            that the length of the starting line segment was 1 inch and that we were somehow
            able to create a Koch curve that consisted of 100 steps. If we could grab the curve
            by the two end points and stretch it out so that it expanded to its full length, our
            1 inch Koch curve would be long enough to wrap around the Earth at the equator
            nearly fourth thousand times! In fact, as the number of step goes to infinity, so does
            the total length of the Koch curve. The reason is that the growth rate of the Koch
            curve is exponential; thus, despite the fact that the length after a small number of
            steps is small, the rate of growth is such that with a moderate number of iterations,
            the resulting length is truly gargantuan.


5.3 The Peano Curve
            Since we can obviously enclose the Koch curve in a box, all of this would seem to
            imply that in some ways (at least mathematically) it is possible to twist a line of
            infinite length within a finite area. In 1890 Giuseppe Peano introduced a type of
67           Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry




                                   Figure 5.5       One step of the Peano curve


             infinite-length curve that not only can fit within an enclosed area but can also fill
             it. Such curves are known as space-filling curves and were also studied by David
             Hilbert shortly after Peano.
                 Like the Cantor set and the Koch curve, the Peano curve starts with an initial
             line segment and is expanded iteratively with a simple rule. For each step in the
             construction we replace all line segments from the previous step with a curve con-
             sisting of nine smaller line segments. Each of the smaller line segments is one-third
             the length of the line segments from the previous step. There will also be eight 90
             degree turns between each of the new smaller line segments. Figure 5.5 illustrates
             the curve that results from expanding one line segment. The arrows illustrate the
             path of the curve and reveal that there are two points where the corners touch.
                 Despite the intersections in the transformation, it is clear that one could draw
             the curve with pencil and paper without lifting the pencil oﬀ the paper. Also note
             that both end points of the curve after one transformation are in the same location
             as before the transformation. Thus, we are justified in calling the Peano curve a
             “curve,” since one could draw the whole Peano curve that stopped at any finite step
             without lifting the pencil from the paper.
                 The later stages of the Peano curve are illustrated in Figure 5.6. As can be
             clearly seen, by step 4 we have come close to filling a square. Since each step in the
             construction replaces each line segment with nine new line segments that have a
             length one-third the previous size, the total length of the Peano curve is multiplied
             by a factor of 3 at each stage; thus, if the starting line segment had a length of 1,
             the step 4 Peano curve in Figure 5.6 has a length of 81.


5.4 Fractional Dimensions
             Knowing what you know about the Cantor set, the Koch curve, and the Peano
             curve, how would you classify them in terms of dimension? Is the Peano curve just
             a very long line, and if it is, does it therefore merit a dimension of 1, just like any
             other line? What about the Cantor set? We know that it has zero measure. Does
68   Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry




                Step 2                       Step 3                      Step 4




                Figure 5.6    The second through fourth steps of the Peano curve


     this imply that the Cantor set should be classified as having a dimension of 0? In
     the case of the Cantor set, we may be content to say that it is “point-like” because
     it has zero measure, but this seems to ignore the fact that the Cantor set also has
     an uncountably infinite number of points within it.
         The diﬃculty in assigning a dimension to an object is not unique to the math-
     ematical monsters from this chapter. In fact, a similar phenomenon was reported
     (posthumously) in 1961 by the English meteorologist Lewis Richardson when he
     attempted to measure the lengths of various coastlines. Richardson found that
     the apparent length of a coastline seemed to increase whenever the length of the
     measuring stick was reduced. For example, the diﬀerence between two maps, one
     with 10 miles scaled to 1 inch and the other with 1 mile scaled to 1 inch, is that
     the latter map simply shows much more detail than the former. Thus, to measure
     the length of a coastline at greater magnification than before, one would have to
     consider small inlets, streams, and peninsulas that may have been invisible on the
     coarser map. This phenomenon is partially illustrated in the sequence of images
     shown in Figure 5.7. When moving to even greater magnifications, the twists and
     turns of individual rocks and speckles of sand would aﬀect the measurement as well.
     How, then, do we measure the length of a coastline? Are coastlines simply infinite
     in length?
         Richardson found that when the logarithm of the length of the measuring unit
     was plotted against the logarithm of the total length of a coastline, the points tended
     to lie on a straight line. The slope of the resulting line in some ways measured the
     amount of “meandering” of the coastline. Mandelbrot (the father of fractals) found
     Richardson’s work and realized that mathematical monsters could be classified in
     a similar manner. In this section, we will duplicate some of the analysis performed
     by Richardson and Mandelbrot to discover what it really means for something to
     have a fractional dimension.
69   Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry




            (a)                                                  (b)




             (c)                                                 (d)




             (e)                                                 (f)


     Figure 5.7 Maps of the United States. Each subsequent image enlarges a portion of
     the previous image by a factor of 2. The last image is of the Chesapeake Bay area oﬀ the
     coast of Maryland
70   Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry



         Let us review some basic ideas from geometry that will help us in solving this
     dilemma. Suppose you had a measuring stick and an object to measure. In standard
     terminology we refer to the one-dimensional measure of something as length, the
     two-dimensional measure as area, and the three-dimensional measure as volume.
     For consistency, let us refer to all of those things by the single generic term measure.
         Suppose that the measure of our measuring device was equal to a. We can
     compute the measure of some object under consideration by estimating it in terms
     of a, that is, we use our measuring stick as the base unit. In this case, if the measure
     of the object is N units of a, then the total measure of the object is equal to a × N .
         Using this technique, you would get predictable results when measuring a line-
     like object or a plane-like object. Moreover, if you changed the size of the measuring
     stick to some other value, you would still get approximately the same measurements.
     Note that this aspect of taking measurements is distinctly not true when it comes
     to measuring the Cantor set, the Koch curve, or the Peano curve. Looking at the
     full Koch curve, if you take your unit measure to be a = 1/3, you will get a total
     length of a × N = 4/3. But if you take a = 1/9, you will get a × N = 16/9,
     which is not the same. As we saw earlier, as a approaches 0, the total length of
     the Koch curve approaches infinity. Our goal for this section is to figure out some
     way of categorizing the dimension of fractal objects that does not ignore the infinite
     complexity they contain.
         Notice that whenever we measure an object, we always have the equality
                                                 & 'D
                                                    1
                                            N=           ,
                                                    a
     where D is the dimension of the object. This equation is just another way of saying
     that the measure of a length is linear, the measure of an area is squared, and the
     measure of a three-dimensional volume is cubed. With a little bit of coercion3 we
     can rewrite the equation above as:
                                                  log N
                                            D=       $ %,
                                                 log a1
     which means that the dimension of an object can be computed in terms of the
     measuring device used. The base of the logarithms used in the equation is irrelevant,
     since all bases give the same result for this equation. Let’s see how this equation
     behaves when we give it some known values. If we wanted to compute the dimension
     of the length of a line from the earlier example, we would always get something like
     N = 10 and a = 1/10, which gives us D = log 10/log 10 = 1. For the face of a wall
     we would have D = log 100/log 10 = 2. These results would seem to confirm the
     fact that our dimension-measuring equation makes some sense for “normal” objects.
     What about the mathematical monsters from the earlier portions of this chapter?
        3
                              $ 1 %D             $ 1 %D            $1%         log N
        The derivation is N =       ⇒ log N = log       ⇒ log N = D log       ⇒D=         1     .
                                a                   a                     a         log ( a )
71           Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry



                 To construct the Cantor set, we started with a line segment on the interval [0, 1].
             After the first step, we removed the middle third. Therefore, for this stage of the
             construction, let’s use a value of 1/3 for a. Exactly two line segments of length 13
             remain after the first stage, which gives us a dimension of log 2/log 3. Since the
             measure of fractal objects seems to change drastically when we alter the length of
             the measuring stick, let’s see what happens for smaller values of a.
                 Carrying out the same analysis for the next step in the construction of the Cantor
             set, we get four line segments with length 1/9. In general, at any stage n of the
             construction, if we take a to be 1/3n we always get D = log 2n /log 3n . The n’s
             always cancel each other out, which means that no matter how small we make our
             measuring stick, we always get the same result: D = log 2/log 3 ≃ 0.63093. Thus,
             we have somehow expanded on the notion that the Cantor set is something more
             than a point but less than a line: It is an object with a fractional dimension between
             0 and 1.
                 For the Koch curve, if the value of a is 1/3n (for stage n), then the total length at
             stage n is always equal to 4n /3n . This yields a dimension of log 4/log 3 ≃ 1.26186,
             which means that the Koch curve is slightly more than a line but less than a plane.
                 The Peano curve has a subtle surprise for us. Once again using a = 1/3n , we
             get a dimension of log 9/log 3 since each line segment is expanded into nine new
             line segments that are one-third the size of the original. However, log 9/log 3 = 2,
             which is an integer. This may seem like a strange result, but if we consider the fact
             that the Peano curve is a space-filling curve, then the result makes some sense after
             all. Thus, the Peano curve, constructed out to an infinite number of steps, has the
             same dimension as a plane.


5.5 Random Fractals in Nature and Brownian Motion
             When we look at natural phenomena such as the roots of a tree, rivers, coastlines,
             and clouds, it is easy to see that not all of nature is adequately described by straight
             lines, curves, or even pure fractals. Most of the listed phenomena seem to have a
             stochastic or random aspect, leaving us to conclude that some of the analysis that
             we did in the last section may not necessarily apply to these types of phenom-
             ena. However, as we will see in this section, randomness and self-similarity are not
             mutually exclusive concepts.
                 A random walk is a path generated by a random process. One way to generate
             such a path would be to take a drunk person, blindfold him or her, spin the person
             around a few times, then let him or her go. Another, although less interesting,
             method for generating a random walk is to take the x and y coordinates of some
             object, and add to those values two random step sizes. The random steps sizes can
             be calculated such that they are always equal to either -1 or +1. The new location
             is the previous location plus the random steps. Repeat as often as you like, for as
             many steps as you wish.
72   Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry




     (a)                              (b)                                (c)


     Figure 5.8 Random walks. (a) 100 big steps; (b) same as (a) except with 100 small
     steps between each big step; and (c) the first 100 small steps from (b)


         Suppose that we are able to simulate the path of a drunkard’s walk with a
     computer and the method mentioned above. Let’s pretend that we can photograph
     our virtual drunkard at some shutter speed such that we are able to get about 100
     photographs of the drunkard, in sequence. The leftmost image in Figure 5.8a shows
     what the path of our drunkard could look like under this experimental setup.
         For comparison, let’s suppose that the drunk really moves a great deal between
     each photograph, and that we are able to set up a second camera that can shoot
     pictures about 100 times faster than the first. The new path is illustrated by the
     middle image of Figure 5.8b, and shows considerably more detail than the original
     random walk.
         Referring back to the first path, on the left of Figure 5.8a, let’s now look at just
     the first step. With the second camera, the single step from the first random walk
     will have 100 sub-steps to it. The third image in Figure 5.8c shows this path, and
     has been enlarged for illustrative purposes.
         Obviously, the first and third images of Figure 5.8 are not identical, but suppose
     you didn’t know ahead of time which image corresponded to which sampling rate.
     Would you be able to say with certainty which image was a sub-path of the other?
     You probably could not solve this puzzle with any success better than a guess, since
     random processes in nature are often self-similar on varying temporal and spatial
     scales. The random walk described above is closely related to Brownian motion,
     which is found in the movement of particles in liquids, and white noise, which
     is often used to describe other things believed to be formed by random walk-like
     processes.
         Another instance of white noise can be found in economic data. Figure 5.9 show
     the S&P 500 stock index for one year, five year, and ten year spans. There is clearly
     an upward trend to the time series, since the global economy has been steadily
     expanding since stocks have been traded. Once again, let’s suppose that these time
73                Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry


                                                               S&P 500 - 1 Year
                                      560


                                      540


                                      520


                                      500


                                      480


                                      460


                                      440
                                             1994.6   1994.8        1995          1995.2    1995.4

                                                                     (a)
                         S&P 500 - 5 Years                                                           S&P 500 - 10 Years
     600                                                                   550


     550                                                                   500

                                                                           450
     500

                                                                           400
     450
                                                                           350
     400
                                                                           300

     350
                                                                           250

     300                                                                   200

     250                                                                   150
           1991   1992         1993          1994     1995                       1986      1988         1990         1992   1994

                                (b)                                                                      (c)


                  Figure 5.9 The S&P 500 stock index shown on various time scales. (a) one year, (b)
                  five years, (c) ten years



                  series are not labeled. Can you identify which time series represented what time
                  span? One might assume that since the market appears to increase over the long run,
                  time series that do not show a strong upward trend are more likely to be taken from
                  a short time span. However, professional stock traders have been known to mistake
                  daily data for yearly or ten year data. Time series data is even more confusing
                  after it has been detrended, that is, the general drift is removed. In fact, detrended
                  financial data can pass many statistical tests for randomness, which implies that
                  financial time series may not merely look random, but are actually generated from
                  extremely complicated processes that contain similar events occurring on many
74   Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry




             Figure 5.10    An example of growth from diﬀusion limited aggregation


     scales. Thus, self-similarity from random-like processes can extend to the economic
     sector as well.
         Related to Brownian motion is a process known as diﬀusion limited aggregation.
     Suppose there exists a medium in which many particles move via Brownian motion.
     Furthermore, imagine that each particle has the property that it continues to move
     as long as it never touches a stationary object. We can “seed” a growth process by
     placing a single fixed particle in the center of our mixture. Eventually, a moving
     particle will touch the fixed particle and will become fixed itself. As the process
     continues, more and more particles will stick to the growing structure, resulting
75           Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry




             Figure 5.11 Fractal mountain generated by xmountains (an X Windows program writ-
             ten by Steven Booth)


             in something that looks similar to Figure 5.10. Diﬀusion limited aggregation is
             found in crystal growth, coral reefs, and other natural systems. The self-similarity
             of the resulting structures always has a fractional dimension since diﬀusion limited
             aggregation is a process that occurs on multiple spatial scales.
                 A three-dimensional version of Brownian motion also yields a very good de-
             scription of how mountains, streams, and coastlines look. Figure 5.11 shows a
             landscape that was generated with a relatively simple program called xmountains.
             The method used to generate the image is a bit too complex to describe in this
             book, but this does not diminish the fact that the image is very realistic.
                 A diﬀerent type of random self-similarity can be found in clouds. Sometimes,
             clouds that are thousands of feet away look close enough to touch. But on the
             other hand, close clouds often appear to be very far away. All of this is due to
             self-similarity on multiple spatial scales.


5.6 Further Exploration
             This section contains a brief overview on how to use diffuse, a program that
             simulates diﬀusion limited aggregation. The program starts with a single point
             seed located in the middle of the plot, that is fixed throughout the entire simulation,
             and several pixel-size floating particles (with the number determined by the -num
             option) that are placed randomly on the screen. At each time step, the particles will
             float about the screen in a random-walk pattern, each independent of one another.
             Any particle that moves adjacent to a fixed cell (such as the seed) will become fixed
             as well, resulting in a new floating particle being randomly regenerated to take the
             newly fixed particle’s place. In this way, a stochastic fractal gradually grows on the
             screen.
76           Self-Similarity and Fractal Geometry



                  Option Name         Option Type      Option Meaning
                  -width              integer          width of the plot in pixels
                  -height             integer          height of the plot in pixels
                  -num                integer          number of floating particles
                  -steps              integer          number of simulated steps
                  -invis              switch           invisible particles?
                  -seed               integer          random seed for initial state
                  -inv                switch           invert colors?
                  -xmag               integer          magnification factor for X Windows
                  -term               string           how to plot points


                                 Table 5.2   Command-line options for diffuse


                Table 5.2 lists the legal command-line options for diffuse. To vary the simula-
             tion between runs, you should use a diﬀerent seed and try diﬀerent values for the
             -num option. This program also has an option called -invis which only aﬀects the
             output when the -term option is set to x11. When correctly used, the particles will
             be displayed only when they become fixed in location; thus, no floating particles
             will be displayed. This makes the simulation run much faster.
                The next chapter will introduce another method of generating fractals that will
             enable you to produce the deterministic fractals illustrated earlier in this chapter.


5.7 Further Reading
              Mandelbrot, B. (1983). The fractal geometry of nature. New York: W. H. Freeman.
              Peitgen, H.-O., Jürgens, H., & Saupe, D. (1992). Chaos and fractals. New York:
              Springer-Verlag.
              Schroeder, M. (1991). Fractals, chaos, power laws. New York: W. H. Freeman.
6   L-Systems and Fractal Growth




                The development of an organism . . . may be considered as the execution of a
    “developmental program” present in the fertilized egg. . . . A central task of developmental
             biology is to discover the underlying algorithm from the course of development.
                                            — Aristid Lindenmayer and Grzegorz Rozenberg


                                                  Nature uses as little as possible of anything.
                                                                           — Johannes Kepler




    From what we have seen in the last chapter, fractals seem to be very good at
    squeezing a great deal of length—perhaps infinite—into a small finite area. This
    property, which, for lack of a better term, we can think of as packing eﬃciency, is
    found in virtually every organism in nature. For example, a great deal of the work
    performed by the human body involves circulatory functions, which have the goal
    of moving something from one part of the body to another. This task, while simple
    to state, is in fact very complex and involves a delicate trade-oﬀ between conflicting
    goals. If we were to design a circulatory system from scratch, one requirement
    would be that our system should be capable of transmitting things from potentially
    any source to any destination. However, we would also want our circulatory system
    to have as small a volume as possible, since it is obviously not feasible to make an
    organism that consists entirely of plumbing. Nature solves the problem by building
    circulatory systems with fractal geometry that achieves both of the goals.
        We encounter similar designs in many other types of natural systems, as shown
    in Figure 6.1: Wrinkled folds on the surface of the brain maximize surface area;
    the respiratory, lymphatic, and nervous systems all have a fractal treelike organi-
    zation similar to the circulatory system; complicated fractal folding is found on the
    macroscopic level of the kidneys and also on the microscopic level of mitochondria.
        Nature minimizes material requirements while maximizing functionality through
    the ubiquitous use of fractals. However, all of our examples have one very important
    aspect that, while obvious once seen, is easily overlooked: Fractals in biological
    systems must be grown.
78           L-Systems and Fractal Growth




           (a)                                     (b)                               (c)


             Figure 6.1   Naturally occurring fractals in the human body: (a) brain, (b) lungs, (c)
             kidney


                 Why is this important? When something is grown, the instructions for how
             the growth is to progress must be contained somewhere. In the case of biological
             systems, the programs for all cell growth are found in DNA, which contains instruc-
             tions that are as digital as those found in computers. Toward the end of this book
             part we will examine a topic, known as algorithmic complexity, that will shed some
             light as to why it is important for biological systems to have eﬃciently encoded
             growth instructions.
                 In 1968, Aristid Lindenmayer, a biologist, invented a formalism that yields a
             mathematical description of plant growth known as an L-system. L-systems can
             be used to eﬃciently describe not only plant growth but also many types of math-
             ematical monsters, including the examples from the last chapter. L-systems are
             also remarkably compact, which is especially impressive when one considers the in-
             finite detail that can be found in fractals. We will use L-systems in this chapter to
             generate some familiar and not-so-familiar objects.


6.1 Production Systems
             Since L-systems describe growth, an L-system consists of a special seed cell and a
             description of how new cell types can be generated from old cell types. The seed
             cell is known as an axiom, and for a particular L-system all growth starts from the
             same axiom. The descriptions of how to grow new cell types from old cell types are
             known as production rules. Consider the following L-system as an example:
                                         Axiom:      B
                                          Rules:     B → F [−B] + B
                                                     F → FF
79    L-Systems and Fractal Growth



     Depth                                                               Resulting String
       0                                                                              B
       1                                                                     F [−B] + B
       2                                                 F F [−F [−B] + B] + F [−B] + B
       3     F F F F [−F F [−F [−B] + B] + F [−B] + B] + F F [−F [−B] + B] + F [−B] + B


                   Table 6.1   Simultaneous string substitutions in an L-system


          You don’t need to worry about what the symbols mean, since we are concerned,
      at this point, only with how to “grow” things with the L-system. The rules specify a
      simple rewriting scheme that involves taking the axiom and substituting as many of
      the symbols as we can, as specified by the rules. After performing the substitution
      on the axiom, we will have another string of symbols. We can apply the substitution
      rules on this result to get a third string of symbols, and so on. Using the L-system
      specified above yields the strings shown in Table 6.1.
          The length of the string grows dramatically at each step, but what does the string
      mean? By itself, the string means absolutely nothing, but in the context of a device
      that can interpret each symbol as a simple instruction, the string can represent the
      building plan for a fractal structure. For example, one such interpreting device can
      be found in the cellular machinery of plants and animals. In algae (and almost
      all multicelled organisms) it is known that individual cells can specialize in how
      they reproduce. Figure 6.2 illustrates how a hypothetical algae strain could grow
      as specified by the production rules (and ignoring the brackets).
          Initially, we start with a single B cell. At some future time the lone B cell could
      reproduce as specified by the B → F [−B] + B rule. Next, the resulting B cells
      and the single F cell could each divide again—producing the third generation—but
      notice that the F cell reproduced as specified by the F → F F rule.


                                                                B             B
                                                           B   -+             -+   B
                                                                F        F
                                                                    -+

                                       B         B                   F
                                            -+

                     B                      F                        F



                          Figure 6.2   String substitution as cell division
80           L-Systems and Fractal Growth



                Cmd.       Turtle Action
                 F         (Draw Forward) Move the turtle forward by a fixed length, drawing
                           a line from the old position to the new position.
                   G       (Go Forward) Move the turtle forward by a fixed length, but do
                           not draw a line.
                   +       Turn the turtle to the right by a fixed angle. If an integer precedes
                           the “+” symbol, then the turtle eﬀectively makes that number of
                           right-hand turns.
                   −       Turn the turtle to the left by a fixed angle. If an integer precedes
                           the “−” symbol, then the turtle eﬀectively makes that number of
                           left-hand turns.
                    [      Save the turtle’s current position and angle for later use onto a
                           stack of saved states.
                    ]      Remove the last saved state from the stack and use it to restore
                           the turtle’s last saved position and angle.
                    |      Move the turtle forward by a length computed from the execution
                           depth, drawing a line from the old position to the new.


                                      Table 6.2    Turtle graphics commands


                In this manner, it is easy to see that cell specialization combined with growth
             rules specific to each cell type can result in some interesting growth patterns. Next,
             we will look at another related method of interpreting the symbols produced by an
             L-system that can be used by a computer to produce simulated growth.


6.2 Turtle Graphics
             The concept of turtle graphics originated with Seymour Papert as a simple computer
             language that children could use to draw graphical pictures. We will use a modi-
             fied turtle graphics language to interpret strings generated from L-systems. Under
             turtle graphics, plotting is performed by a smart little turtle that can follow certain
             commands. Most of the commands involve simple forward movement or rotation.
             The state of the turtle is represented by the turtle’s current (x, y) coordinates and
             the angle that the turtle is pointing. Table 6.2 lists all of the commands that the
             turtle knows how to follow.1
                 If the turtle receives a command that is not in the list, it will ignore the command
             and do nothing. Looking back at the last three strings generated by the example
                1 The “|” command is an advanced command that is not strictly required, but makes certain

             types of images easier to draw. See Section 6.3 for further details.
81           L-Systems and Fractal Growth




                                       Figure 6.3   Three L-system stages


             L-system, our turtle would produce the three images in Figure 6.3; they correspond
             to the images in Figure 6.2, from left to right.
                 For the images, the “+” and “−” commands rotate the turtle by 20 degrees.
             In general, we will be allowed to set this angle to anything that we wish. Since
             the first image corresponds to the string “F [−B] + B,” the turtle draws a single
             line; however, it is worth noting that after drawing the figure, the turtle will be
             pointing 20 degrees to the right of the single line because of the last “+” command.
             The second image corresponds to the string “F F [−F [−B] + B] + F [−B] + B.”
             The second image looks like a “Y” with the main segment double the length of the
             original because the first rule, B → F [−B] + B, in eﬀect orders the turtle to convert
             all Bs to “Y” branches, while the second rule, F → F F , doubles the length of all
             interior stems. In the third image, all of the segments double in length once again
             and all exterior stems branch into two more stems.
                 Notice that the “[” command tells the turtle to remember where it currently
             is. When the matching “]” is encountered, the saved state is restored. Having this
             ability is not strictly necessary for many L-systems, but it does save us the trouble of
             having to construct additional rules to backtrack to some prior position and angle.


6.3 Further Exploration
             This section contains a brief tutorial on how to use lsys, which is the program used
             to generate all of the images in this chapter. A list of the legal options can be found
             in Table 6.3. Many of the options are self-explanatory; however, the options that
             are specific to lsys will be discussed in greater detail.
                 The -a0 option is used to specify the starting angle of the turtle. The option
             is given in degrees, where 0 degrees corresponds to pointing at 12 o’clock, and 90
             degrees refers to 3 o’clock. The -da option specifies the number of degrees that the
             “+” and “−” commands will rotate the turtle.
                 The -ds option can be cleverly used to make the L-system produce images that
             are scale-invariant in the depth. If a “F ,” “G,” or “|” command is processed at
             a depth of d, then the step size will be equal to δ d , where δ is the value specified
             with -ds, which should always be less than or equal to one. By using this option
82   L-Systems and Fractal Growth



          Option Name         Option Type       Option Meaning
          -width              integer           width of the plot in pixels
          -height             integer           height of the plot in pixels
          -border             integer           number of pixels in border
          -depth              integer           recursion depth of L-system
          -a0                 double            initial angle
          -da                 double            delta angle
          -ds                 double            delta step size factor
          -unoise             double            amount of uniform noise to use
          -rule               string            specify a production rule
          -axiom              string            starting axiom
          -inv                switch            invert all colors?
          -xmag               integer           magnification factor for X Windows
          -term               string            how to plot points


                        Table 6.3    The command-line options for lsys



     in conjunction with the “|,” you can more easily build fractals that are made of
     segments of diﬀerent lengths. For example, Big-H in Figure 6.4 uses the rule F →
     |[+F ][−F ] and a step size of 0.65. Unlike the “F ” and “G” commands, the “|”
     command is processed by the lsys program at every depth, not just the final depth,
     since the “|” command is never recursively expanded. The “|” command essentially
     means that the lsys program should draw a line whose length is computed by
     the current step size. With these options, the Big-H figure is drawn such that each
     branch is drawn 65 percent the size of the previously drawn branch. Controlling the
     ratio of subsequent branch sizes would be extremely diﬃcult without this option.
         The -unoise option specifies the amount of uniform noise to add to the angles
     for each L-system command that moves the turtle forward. This option can have
     the eﬀect of making the images look more natural by adding unexpected twists and
     turns that could be found in real plant growth.
         The -rule option is used to specify all of the rules for the computed L-system.
     For each rule that is required, you should use the pair “-rule F=ABC” to specify
     the rule. There can be no spaces in the rule, and the cases of the letters are ignored;
     thus “-rule F=ABC” is the same as “-rule f=abc.” You may also need to enclose
     the rule strings with quotes to protect them from being interpreted by the command
     shell of your computer.
         The best way to learn more about L-systems is to use lsys to generate your
     own L-systems. You could start by trying to reproduce the L-systems illustrated
     at the end of this chapter. The rules and delta angle are supplied for each figure.
     You may still need to figure out appropriate values for the options -ds, -a0, and
83   L-Systems and Fractal Growth



      The Chomsky Hierarchy of Formal Languages                              Digression 6.1

       In 1959 Noam Chomsky introduced four types of formal languages that form what
       is now known as the Chomsky hierarchy of formal languages. The language types
       can be classified by the types of productions that are permitted in their grammars.
       For each of the descriptions below, uppercase Roman letters will be used to represent
       nonterminal symbols that can be further expanded, lowercase Roman letters will be
       used to represent terminal symbols (which cannot be further expanded), and Greek
       letters will be used to represent an arbitrary string of terminal or nonterminal letters.
       Regular: Regular grammars may consist only of rules in the form of A → b or
           A → bC.
       Context-Free: The context-free grammars may have rules of the form A → α, and
           are therefore unrestricted in the form that the right-hand side of production
           rules may take.
       Context-Sensitive: Context-sensitive grammars may have rules of the form αAβ →
           αγβ, where γ is not the empty string.
       Unrestricted: The unrestricted grammars are identical to the context-sensitive
           grammars except that γ may be the empty string.

       The four grammar types generate exactly the same languages and sets that are rec-
       ognized by finite-state machines, pushdown automata, linear bounded automata, and
       Turing machines, respectively. L-systems can be thought of as special types of context-
       free grammars that operate in parallel.




     -depth. After mastering the L-systems in this chapter, you can go on to make your
     own. For your first attempt, try executing the command:
          lsys -depth 3 -a0 90 -da 60 -rule "F=F-F++F-F"
     which should produce the Koch curve from the last chapter. You can change the
     depth option to a larger number to make a more detailed picture.
         Several more examples are given in Figures 6.4–6.11, which appear over the
     next few pages. These examples illustrate how some interesting structures can be
     generated with L-systems. Each L-system will be shown with three images: the
     first two are the first two interesting stages of the L-system and the last image is
     some later stage. Some of the rules may seem confusing at first glance; however,
     this should not stop you from aesthetically appreciating the figures.
         Readers familiar with the C programming language may wish to look at the
     source code for lsys. With the exception of the low-level graphics routines and the
     command line parsing functions, the whole program, excluding comments, fits in
     about two full pages.
84   L-Systems and Fractal Growth



             Big-H       Angle: 90      Axiom: [F ]−−F      Rule(s): F = |[+F ][−F ]




            Bent-Big-H     Angle: 80      Axiom: [F ]−−F     Rule(s): F = |[+F ][−F ]




            Two-Ys        Angle: 45      Axiom: [F ]4−F      Rule(s): F = |[+F ][−F ]




     Figure 6.4 Simple branching fractals: Big-H and Bent-Big-H use the “|” command to
     draw consecutive segments lengths in a 20:13 ratio, which I found more pleasing to the
     eye than 2:1. The only diﬀerence between Big-H and Bent-Big-H is in the specified angle,
     which diﬀers by 10 degrees. All of these figures eﬃciently divide the square plane into a
     network structure, as found in many biological systems.
85   L-Systems and Fractal Growth




              Twig        Angle: 20        Axiom: F        Rule(s): F = |[−F ][+F ]




             Weed-1       Angle: 25      Axiom: F        Rule(s): F = F [−F ]F [+F ]F




             Weed-2       Angle: 25       Axiom: F        Rule(s): F = |[−F ]|[+F ]F




     Figure 6.5 Plantlike fractals: With only a little bit of eﬀort, one can change the turn
     angle, the ratio between consecutive segments, and the rules to produce a wide variety of
     weed-like and twig-like structures.
86   L-Systems and Fractal Growth




            Weed-3         Angle: 20         Axiom: F         Rule(s): F = |[−F ]|[+F ][−F ]F




         Bush-1      Angle: 25    Axiom: F      Rule(s): F = F F + [+F − F − F ] − [−F + F + F ]




            Bush-2          Angle: 20        Axiom: F          Rule(s): F = |[+F ]|[−F ] + F




     Figure 6.6 More plantlike fractals: The production rules are now a bit more complicated
     but yield even more realistic plant growth.
87   L-Systems and Fractal Growth




           Tree-1        Angle: 20        Axiom: F         Rule(s): F = |[3 − F ][3 + F ]|[−−F ][+ + F ]|F




       Tree-2    Angle: 8   Axiom: F   Rule(s): F = |[5 + F ][7 − F ] − |[4 + F ][6 − F ] − |[3 + F ][5 − F ] − |F




                Tree-3        Angle: 20           Axiom: F              Rule(s): F = |[−−F ][+F ] − F




     Figure 6.7 And yet more plantlike fractals: Tree-1 has an increased branching factor
     that creates a fuller image. Tree-2 illustrates how to use a small turning angle to make
     more realistic curves.
88   L-Systems and Fractal Growth




         Carpet     Angle: 90       Axiom: F − F − F − F     Rule(s): F = F [F ] − F + F [−−F ] + F − F




         Sierpinski-Square      Angle: 90     Axiom: F − F − F − F    Rule(s): F = F F [−F − F − F ]F




            Rug         Angle: 90           Axiom: F − F − F − F       Rule(s): F = F [−F − F ]F F




     Figure 6.8 Mosaic fractals: It is interesting to see that Carpet and Sierpinski-Square
     are identical at the second expansion stage but diverge greatly later on. Many other
     interesting patterns of this type can be found with only a subtle change to a single rule.
89   L-Systems and Fractal Growth




          Koch-Island       Angle: 60       Axiom: F + +F + +F        Rule(s): F = F − F + +F − F




      Quadric-Koch-Island   Angle: 90   Axiom: F − F − F − F   Rule(s): F = F − F + F + F F − F − F + F




        Square-Spikes   Angle: 5    Axiom: F 18 − F 18 − F 18 − F   Rule(s): F = F 17 − F 34 + F 17 − F




     Figure 6.9 Fractals islands: The Koch-Island consists of three Koch curves from the
     last chapter pasted together. The Quadric-Koch-Island continues on a similar theme as
     the Koch-Island, but uses more turns with right angles. Square-Spikes is an example of
     how to eﬀectively use the feature that turning commands can be preceded by an integer.
90   L-Systems and Fractal Growth



       Sierpinski-Gasket     Angle: 60   Axiom: F −−F −−F       Rule(s): F = F −−F −−F −−GG, G = GG




        Sierpinski-Maze      Angle: 60    Axiom: F      Rule(s): F = [GF ][+G3 − F ][G + G + F ], G = GG




      Sierpinski-Arrowhead   Angle: 60   Axiom: F    Rule(s): F = [−G + + + F ][−G + F ][GG−−F ], G = GG




     Figure 6.10 Sierpinski triangles: The Sierpinski-Gasket L-system rules convert each line
     segment into three new line segments that form a triangle. Unlike the other two L-systems,
     the Sierpinski-Maze is totally unconnected. The Sierpinski-Arrowhead is formed by one
     long and continuous curve. These three L-systems also illustrate how to use multiple
     rules. In this case we have expanded the “G” turtle graphics command so as to increase
     the distance between line segments.
91   L-Systems and Fractal Growth



              Penrose-Snowflake         Angle: 18          Axiom: F 4 − F 4 − F 4 − F 4 − F    Rule(s):

      F = F 4 − F 4 − F 10 − F + +F 4 − F




             Penrose-Tile         Angle: 36         Axiom: [X] + +[X] + +[X] + +[X] + +[X]     Rule(s):

      W = Y F + +ZF 4 − XF [−Y F 4 − W F ] + +, X = +Y F −−ZF [3 − W F −−XF ]+, Y = −W F + +XF [+ +

      +Y F + +ZF ]−, Z = −−Y F + + + +W F [+ZF + + + +XF ]−−XF, F =




         Dragon-Curve       Angle: 45   Axiom: F       Rule(s): F = [+F ][+G−−G4 − F ], G = −G + +G−




     Figure 6.11 Fractal oddities: The first two L-systems form aperiodic tilings of the plane.
     The Dragon-Curve is one long and continuous curve with only right-angle turns. The rules
     for Penrose-Tile originated with the DOS program fractint.
92           L-Systems and Fractal Growth



6.4 Further Reading
              Charles-Edwards, D. A. (1986). Modelling plant growth and development. New
              York: Academic Press.
              Dewdney, A. K. (1989). The Turing omnibus: 61 excursions in computer science.
              Rockville, Md.: Computer Science Press.
              Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New
              York: Basic Books.
              Prusinkiewicz, P., Lindenmayer, A., Hanan, J. S., et al. (1990). The algorithmic
              beauty of plants. New York: Springer-Verlag.
              Stanley, H. E. & Ostrowsky, N. (Eds.). (1985). On growth and form: Fractal and
              non fractal patterns in physics. Kluwer Academic.
7   Aﬃne Transformation Fractals




        Fractal geometry will make you see everything diﬀerently. There is danger in reading
       further. You risk the loss of your childhood vision of clouds, forests, flowers, galaxies,
          leaves, feathers, rocks, mountains, torrents of water, carpets, bricks, and much else
               besides. Never again will your interpretation of these things be quite the same.
                                                                        — Michael F. Barnsley


      Clouds are not spheres, mountains are not cones, coastlines are not circles, and bark is
                                     not smooth, nor does lightning travel in a straight line.
                                                                       — Benoit Mandelbrot




    W     hen someone tries to describe a fractal-like object, one common description
    could be “It has a miniature version of itself embedded inside it, but the smaller
    version is slightly rotated,” or something like that. In this chapter, we will study
    two techniques for producing fractals that have the very nice intuitive property that
    they can be described in terms of where and how some miniature versions of the
    object should be placed in order to construct the fractal object.
       The trick is to come up with a way to describe how the miniature version of the
    whole should be placed. In general, there are four types of transformations that
    one could imagine as being useful: translation, scaling, reflection, and rotation.
    All four of these can be described by linear or aﬃne linear operations. This is
    important for two reasons. First, aﬃne linear transformations are mathematically
    simple, in that a single transformation can be described in terms of a matrix and
    vector multiplication or vector addition. Second, multiple linear transformations
    can be composed together to form a single composite linear transformation that
    does exactly what all of the original transformations did, but in a single step.
       In this chapter, we will explore fractals defined by aﬃne linear transformations
    to see how an intuitive form of self-similarity can be seen in a variety of shapes.
    We will begin this chapter with a brief review of linear algebra, which is followed
    by the two aforementioned techniques for building fractals, and finished by several
    examples.
94           Aﬃne Transformation Fractals



7.1 A Review of Linear Algebra
             Linear algebra is the branch of mathematics that deals with matrix and vector
             operations. Technically speaking, a matrix is a rectangular array of numbers such
             as                             (      )      (    )
                                              a b           e
                                                      or
                                               c d          f
             where the terms a through f are understood to be real numbers. The number of
             rows and columns of a matrix specifies the dimension of the matrix; for example,
             our square matrix above is a (2 × 2) matrix, where the first 2 specifies that there
             are two rows and the second 2 specifies that there are two columns. Vectors can be
             thought of as special matrices that have either a single column or a single row. By
             convention, in most mathematical literature the unqualified “vector” term is used
             to signify a column vector (as opposed to a row vector), which is a vector with a
             single column. For convenience, I will sometimes write a column vector as [x y]T ,
             where the T superscript indicates that the vector has been transposed (flipped along
             its diagonal).
                 We can represent points on a plane with a (2 × 1) column vector, if we agree that
             the two numbers in the vector correspond to the x and y coordinates, respectively.
             Our goal for this section is to mathematically describe how translation, scaling,
             reflection, and rotation can be performed with linear algebra. For each of the
             descriptions listed below, you should imagine that we are transforming a simple
             image that can be described by a small number of points. For a more intuitive idea
             of how these translation can be described, consult Figure 7.1, which illustrates each
             transformation geometrically.

             Translation If we wish to move a point on the plane along a straight line to some
             new location, then all that we need to do is to add the x and y oﬀsets (which we will
             call ∆x and ∆y) to the original vector. Translation is really just a simple vector
             addition operation, and is mathematically described by:
                                       (    ) (       ) (              )
                                         x        ∆x          x + ∆x
                                             +           =               .
                                         y        ∆y          y + ∆y


             Scaling The scaling of an image can be changed in such a way that the original
             image is stretched or squeezed into an area with a diﬀerent width and height. If
             we wish to scale an image such that the vertical and horizontal scales are identical,
             then scalar-vector multiplication can be used to scale an image:
                                                (   ) (       )
                                                  x       sx
                                              s      =          .
                                                  y       sy
95   Aﬃne Transformation Fractals




                                          Translation




                                            Scaling




                                           Reflection




                                           Rotation




             Figure 7.1   Geometric representation of aﬃne linear transformations
96          Aﬃne Transformation Fractals



            If s is greater than 1, then the image will be enlarged. If s is less than 1, then the
            image will be reduced in size. Notice in Figure 7.1 that scaling is performed about
            the origin. Suppose we wished to scale an image in such a way that the vertical
            and horizontal scaling diﬀer. We can use a diagonal matrix and matrix-vector
            multiplication to describe such a scaling:
                                       (        ) (      ) (         )
                                         sh 0          x        sh x
                                                  ×        =           ,
                                          0 sv         y        sv y

            where sh is the horizontal scale factor and sv is the vertical scale factor.

            Reflection The reflection operation is very similar to scaling. The only diﬀerence
            is in the diagonal values of the matrix that we use, that is, instead of using positive
            scale factors, one or more of the diagonals may be negative. For example, matrix-
            vector multiplication      (         ) (      ) (        )
                                          −1 0          x        −x
                                                   ×        =
                                           0 1          y         y
            can be used to reflect an image about the y-axis. Changing the signs of the nonzero
            numbers would reflect the image about the x-axis. If both diagonal entries were
            equal to -1, then the image would be reflected simultaneously about the x-axis and
            the y-axis.

            Rotation Matrix-vector multiplication can also be used to rotate an image clock-
            wise or counterclockwise around the origin. Rotation matrices are not as simple as
            the other types of matrices that we have been talking about, but with a little bit of
            eﬀort you should be able to see that the operation
                                      (         ) (     ) (        )
                                          0 1         x         y
                                                  ×       =
                                         −1 0         y        −x

            can be used to rotate an image 90 degrees clockwise.


7.2 Composing Aﬃne Linear Operations
            Before we proceed, let’s pause for a brief experiment. Take a flat, rigid, rectangular
            object such as a stiﬀ piece of posterboard. Alternatively, you could use a thin book
            or even a sheet of paper. Take this object and hold it about one or two feet in front
            of your face. To get the full eﬀect from our experiment, you may wish to close one
            eye to eliminate your depth perception
                Now, with the object in hand, you can perform the four basic transformations
            on your object. Scaling can be achieved by moving the object closer or farther away.
            The reflection operation always spins the object about an axis such that the object
            moves depthwise.
97   Aﬃne Transformation Fractals



      Three-Dimensional Computer Graphics                                   Digression 7.1

       Computer imaging and visualization (including virtual reality) rely on mathematical
       techniques that are very similar to the aﬃne linear operations explored in this chapter.
       In the medical field, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used to take a sort of
       three-dimensional picture of an internal portion of a human body. A computer stores
       an MRI as a set of three-dimensional points that have a special value to indicate the
       intensity of the point.

       With modern computers, doctors can rotate, enlarge, and view slices of internal por-
       tions of the human body without making a single incision in the patient. The problem
       of manipulating the data so that doctors can view the internal portions with varying
       rotation and scale is solved in a two-step manner.

       In the first step, the three-dimensional points are transformed similarly to the way
       we have been manipulating two-dimensional points, except that a (3 × 3) matrix
       and (3 × 1) vector are used instead. Applying the three-dimensional aﬃne linear
       transformation to each point yields a new perspective to the original image. The
       second step in producing the final image is to convert the set of three-dimensional
       points into two-dimensional points that can be plotted on a computer monitor. This
       step is also achieved with matrix multiplication. Additionally, points can be sorted
       by depth to remove portions of the data that should be hidden from view.




        You can compose the operations by doing them in sequence. Notice that it is
     possible to transform the object so that it appears as a parallelogram instead of a
     rectangle. In general, for any way that you can transform the object in your hand,
     there are a matrix and a vector that would mathematically translate a rectangle
     into the same orientation. In this section, we will see why this must be true.
        If we want to translate a single point, [x y]T , by any of the four basic types of
     operations, we can always represent the transformation as
                       (        ) (     ) (       ) (                 )
                         a b          x        e         ax + by + e
                                  ×       +        =                    ,
                         c d          y        f         cx + dy + f
     with the appropriate choices for terms a through f . We can rewrite the operation
     above as a single matrix-vector multiplication operation if we expand the matrix
     and vector dimensions by 1. This gives us
                        ⎡           ⎤ ⎡      ⎤ ⎡                 ⎤
                          a b e            x         ax + by + e
                        ⎣ c d f ⎦ × ⎣ y ⎦ = ⎣ cx + dy + f ⎦ .
                          0 0 1            1              1
     Therefore, if you want to translate, scale, reflect, or rotate any point, there exists
98           Aﬃne Transformation Fractals



                       Seed Image                        MRCM                           Next Image

                                                    All Affine Linear
                                                     Transformations




                                                        Recursion


             Figure 7.2 A schematic of the MRCM algorithm: The whole input image is simultane-
             ously transformed by each of the aﬃne linear rules.


             some choice for the a through f terms in the (3 × 3) matrix that does the required
             job. Now, suppose you really wanted to perform many transformations in sequence.
             We can represent a sequence of operations as C × (B × (A × p)), where p is the
             augmented point vector [x y 1]T , A is the first (3 × 3) transformation matrix1 , B is
             the second, and C is the third. Under linear algebra, we are allowed to rewrite this
             last expression as (C × (B × A)) × p. The (C × (B × A)) portion of the equation
             represents two matrix multiplications, and because multiplying any two (n × n)
             matrices together always results in a third (n × n) matrix, the whole expression
             can be simplified to something like D × p where D = (C × (B × A)). Moreover,
             the bottom row of D will always look like [001]; thus we can rewrite the resulting
             (3 × 3) matrix into a (2 × 2) matrix and a (2 × 1) vector.
                 This concludes the mathematical preliminaries. In the remainder of this chapter,
             we will look at two fractal construction techniques pioneered by Michael Barnsley.
             For both techniques, one or more matrices are used to represent aﬃne linear trans-
             formations. These matrices can always be uniquely described by the six terms a
             through f .


7.3 The Multiple Reduction Copy Machine Algorithm
             The Multiple Reduction Copy Machine (MRCM) algorithm gets its name from the
             fact that one could simulate certain instances of it with a real copy machine. The
             algorithm depends on there being two or more aﬃne linear transformations defined.
             The algorithm is recursive, as is illustrated in Figure 7.2; however, let’s concentrate
             on what happens in a single step.
                1 By convention, whenever an entire matrix or vector is denoted by a single variable, the letter

             is boldface. Moreover, matrices are usually named with uppercase letters and vectors are named
             with lowercase letters.
99   Aﬃne Transformation Fractals



         For our first example MRCM fractal, we have defined three aﬃne linear trans-
     formations that are in reality just scale operations followed by a translation; that
     is, we are reducing the original image and then placing it somewhere else. The
     fractal that we want to produce will look something like the Sierpinski Gasket in
     Figure 6.10, which has a smaller version of the whole fractal embedded within the
     interior of the image at the three corners of the triangle. One could imagine that
     the image was created by a special copy machine that has three lenses instead of
     a single lens. Each lens automatically reduces whatever is being photocopied and
     oﬀsets it by some fixed translation. If we feed this particular MRCM with a seed2
     image as input, the output will look something like the image in Figure 7.3.




                                                   MRCM




                         Figure 7.3      The first step of the MRCM algorithm

        The resulting image shows exactly what the three aﬃne linear transformations
     do: Each moves a smaller version of the image to the corner of a triangle. Suppose
     that, pleased with the resulting image, you wished to photocopy the output for
     posterity, but by mistake you used the MRCM instead of a normal copy machine.
     Figure 7.4 shows what would happen.




                                                   MRCM




                        Figure 7.4      The second step of the MRCM algorithm


        2 In the examples that follow, I have used a seed image that looks like a box with an “L” in a

     corner. The “L” is there so that you can see how the transformations rotate and reflect the seed
     image. In general, the seed image could be anything we wished it to be: a picture of your house,
     or a picture of my cat, or a circle. It really doesn’t matter, since each seed image gets smaller and
     smaller the more times we pass it through the MRCM.
100   Aﬃne Transformation Fractals




                 MRCM                                     MRCM




                 MRCM                                     MRCM




                        Figure 7.5    Many steps of the MRCM algorithm


          Now, this is interesting. For each of the three small squares on the input image,
      the MRCM has placed a miniature version of the input image. Let’s run the output
      image through the MRCM four more times, as shown in Figure 7.5, to see what
      happens.
          As you can see, the last image is remarkably similar to the Sierpinski Gasket
      in the last chapter. To fully appreciate how the MRCM algorithm produces such
      interesting images, let’s take a closer look at how it really works. This first example
      MRCM fractal requires three aﬃne linear transformations to specify where the
      recursive portions of the image are located. Shortly, we will look at other MRCM
      fractals that require even more transformations, but for now, let’s agree that in
      principle we can use as many transformations as we wish. We will refer to the
      number of transformations by n. Another parameter that we can control is the
      number of recursive copies that we make with the MRCM. Let’s call this number
      d for “depth.”
          Before we continue with the analysis, see Figure 7.6; it shows another set of
      MRCM fractals, which should help you to get a feel for how the images are computed
      with a diﬀerent set of rules. Here we have used five aﬃne linear transformations, one
      for each corner of the snowflake. In both example MRCM fractals, the self-similarity
      of the whole fractal is explicitly defined by the transformations used; thus, in the
      images, the five small boxes after the first transformation tell us exactly where later
      images will be self-similar.
          In general, with n transformations computed to a depth of d, the final image
      will have nd smaller versions of the seed image embedded within it; thus, the last
      snowflake-like image has 625 miniature versions of the original seed image inside
      of it. Notice that in the final image the small “L” symbols in each box are not
101   Aﬃne Transformation Fractals




                   Figure 7.6    More MRCM images made with diﬀerent rules


      large enough to see. This is due to the fact that each of the three transformations
      squeezes the previous image into a smaller and smaller region. If we computed
      the MRCM fractal to an infinite depth, each of the smaller versions of the fractal
      would contract into a point. And as you can see, the greater the depth, the more
      interesting the final image. The only problem is that we can compute an image
      only to some finite depth. Moreover, because the final image will have nd small
      seed images inside of it, as d grows larger, nd becomes enormous.
          This raises in an interesting dilemma: To get a very clear image, we must com-
      pute the MRCM fractals to a large depth; however, as the depth grows, the compu-
      tational work required to compute the image grows exponentially. To make things
      worse, for some MRCM fractals, each additional pass through the MRCM reduces
      the building blocks of the image only by a small amount, that is, we really want
      the fractal to be constructed from very small versions of itself; however, if the aﬃne
      linear mappings do not contract the areas of the input images by a large amount, it
      will take a very large depth to make an image that is composed only of very small
      versions of itself. This point is illustrated by the images in Figure 7.7, which are
      the first few stages of an MRCM for producing a fern.
          The fern MRCM has four aﬃne linear transformations in it, which can be seen
      in the second image. The first two are the two small ones that form the leaves. The
      third is the tiny line segment between the leaves that forms the stem. The fourth
      transformation is only slightly rescaled, and tilted a bit to the right. It essentially
      specifies that the top of a fern looks similar to the whole fern—just as the last seven
      feet of an enormous pine tree can look similar to the whole pine tree.
          It is this fourth transformation that causes problems for the MRCM algorithm.
      Since the fourth transformation contracts the area by only a small amount at each
      pass, the final image of the fern is still composed of rather large boxes. We could
      get better results if we computed the MRCM to, say, a depth of 20; however, this
      would require more than 1 trillion recursive transformations to be computed.
          It would be nice if there were some way to compute an MRCM fractal to an
      infinite depth. We can’t really do this, but it turns out that there is a remarkably
      simple way to approximate what such an image would look like. The technique uses
      what is know as an Iterated Functional System (IFS), which we will examine next.
102   Aﬃne Transformation Fractals




             (a)                                         (b)




             (c)                                         (d)


      Figure 7.7 An MRCM Fern which illustrates how the MRCM algorithm can produce
      unsatisfactory results
103          Aﬃne Transformation Fractals



7.4 Iterated Functional Systems
             Before we take a close look at the IFS algorithm, let’s pause to think about what
             an MRCM image would look like if it could be computed to an infinite depth. We
             will refer to such an image as an “idealized MRCM fractal.” Here is a list of useful
             facts that we can deduce about what idealized MRCM fractals will look like:
             Fact 1 An idealized MRCM fractal will be composed entirely of a set of points.
                  We know this is true because each aﬃne linear transformation reduces the size
                  of the seed image. After an infinite number of steps the original seed image
                  must reduce to a point.
             Fact 2 For all of our aﬃne linear transformations (which we will generically refer
                  to as Li (p)), if some point p is part of an idealized MRCM fractal, then, for
                  all i, Li (p) must also be part of the idealized MRCM fractal. This is just
                  another way of saying that an idealized MRCM fractal will have small copies
                  of itself embedded inside of it.
             Fact 3 It is possible for an aﬃne linear transformation, Li (p), to have a unique
                  inverse that we will refer to as L−1
                                                     i (p). If a transformation does not have
                  an inverse, then the transformation must squeeze the input image into a line
                  or point (like the third transformation for the fern, which would produce the
                  stem).
             Fact 4 If Li (p) has an inverse, then for all points within an idealized MRCM fractal,
                  p, L−1
                       i (p) must also be part of the idealized MRCM fractal. This is just
                  another way of saying the reverse of the second fact: An idealized MRCM
                  fractal will look like the composition of a few smaller copies of itself.
             Fact 5 Think of all of the points that are part of an idealized MRCM fractal. Now
                  consider a point that is not part of this set. For all aﬃne linear transforma-
                  tions, Li (p), if p is not part of the idealized MRCM fractal, then Li (p) will be
                  closer to the idealized MRCM fractal than p is. This just states that if you
                  want to make an intelligent guess for a point that is in an idealized MRCM
                  fractal, Li (p) will always be a better choice than p.
                 Putting all of these facts together reveals a remarkable algorithm that was dis-
             covered by Michael Barnsley. The idea of the IFS algorithm is to pick a single
             random point from within a seed image. Next, we randomly pick one of the aﬃne
             linear transformations for some fractal that we want to produce—it doesn’t matter
             which one we choose, just as long as it is random. We transform the random point
             by the randomly chosen rule, which gives us a second point. We can then produce
             a third point by picking another one of the transformation rules randomly and ap-
             plying the second point to it. If we repeat this process for a few thousand points,
             what do you think will happen?
104             Aﬃne Transformation Fractals



                                                       IFS

                                               Single Affine Linear
                                                 Transformation

 Single Point         Random                                                               Next Point

      X                                        Single Affine Linear                            X
      Y                                          Transformation                                Y
                       Choice

                                               Single Affine Linear
                                                 Transformation




                                                    Recursion


                Figure 7.8 A schematic of the IFS algorithm: A single point is transformed by a single
                randomly chosen transformation.



                    First of all, we know that the first few points will probably not be very close
                to the idealized MRCM fractal. However, because of Fact 5 listed earlier, we know
                that each subsequent point will be closer to the real fractal. Knowing this ahead of
                time, we can agree to discard the first 100 or so iterates that we produce.
                    The remaining points will all be extremely close to the idealized MRCM fractal.
                In fact, they will usually be so close that as far as a computer is concerned, the
                iterates are on top of the real fractal (because of limited floating-point precision).
                The gist of the IFS algorithm is illustrated by Figure 7.8.
                    The last detail that we need to be concerned with is how the random choice
                is made among the possible aﬃne linear transformations. If there are n transfor-
                mations, then we could pick any of them with probability n−1 . The problem with
                this method lies in the fact that some transformations take up more space than
                others. Looking back at the four transformations for a fern, the rules for the leaves
                are much smaller than the rule for the body; thus, a smarter way for us to choose
                among the transformations is to randomly pick one with probability proportional
                to the area of the transformation.
                    The determinant of a matrix is a measure of the amount the matrix expands or
                contracts a vector that is multiplied by it. For our (2 × 2) matrices, the determinant
                is computed as ad−bc. If we take the sum of the absolute values of the determinants
105          Aﬃne Transformation Fractals




             Figure 7.9   A fern as computed by an IFS: Compare this with the MRCM ferns computed
             earlier.


             of the transformation matrices, then divide each determinant by the sum, the results
             will correspond to the probabilities that we should use.
                 Care must be taken with special cases in which the determinant is equal to 0
             (such as for the stem of the fern). If we agree to give every transformation at least
             some small chance of being chosen, say 1 percent, the IFS algorithm can usually
             produce excellent results.
                 Figure 7.9 shows the result of running the IFS algorithm on the aﬃne linear
             rules for the fern. Obviously, the IFS approach yields a significant improvement in
             the quality of the image.


7.5 Further Exploration
             All fractal images in this chapter were made with either mrcm or ifs, which you
             can use to explore the MRCM and IFS algorithms. The programs take a few simple
             command-line arguments that are listed in Table 7.1. Each transformation must be
             defined by six numbers that are expected to be found in the file specified by the
             -infile option. If the value of this option is a single dash, input is taken from the
             standard input.
106          Aﬃne Transformation Fractals



                 Option Name       Option Type       Option Meaning

                 Options Common to Both Programs
                 -infile        string         data input file
                 -width         integer        width of the plot in pixels
                 -height        integer        height of the plot in pixels
                 -border        integer        number of pixels in border
                 -inv           switch         invert colors?
                 -xmag          integer        magnification factor for X Windows
                 -term          string         how to plot points

                 Options Only for ifs
                 -its             integer            number of iterations to plot
                 -skip            integer            number of initial iterates to skip

                 Options Only for mrcm
                 -depth           integer            depth of recursive calls
                 -bw              integer            width of the seed box
                 -bh              integer            height of the seed box
                 -L               switch             should an “L” be drawn in each box?


                           Table 7.1   The command-line options for mrcm and ifs


                Most of the options are self-explanatory. For mrcm you should try to vary the
             depth of the recursive calls to generate diﬀerent images. For ifs, you may wish to
             vary the number of iterations.
                Figures 7.10 through 7.17 illustrate some of the possible fractals that one can
             generate with mrcm and ifs. The eight figures give the aﬃne linear transformations
             in both numerical form and geometric form. As an exercise, you could try to
             reproduce some of these fractals on your own.


7.6 Further Reading
              Barnsley, M. (1988). Fractals everywhere. New York: Academic Press.
              Esbensen, B. J. & Davie, H. K. (1996). Echoes for the Eye: Poems to celebrate
              patterns in nature. New York: HarperCollins.
              O’Rourke, J. (1994). Computational geometry in C. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
              versity Press.
              Strang, G. (1980). Linear algebra and its applications. San Diego: Harcourt Brace
              Jovanovich.
107   Aﬃne Transformation Fractals



                     a.        b.        c.       d.       e.         f.
                     0.0000   -0.5000    0.5000   0.0000   0.5000     0.0000
                     0.0000    0.5000   -0.5000   0.0000   0.5000     0.5000
                     0.5000    0.0000    0.0000   0.5000   0.2500     0.5000




                              Figure 7.10   A crystallike structure


                     a.        b.       c.        d.       e.         f.
                     0.7500    0.0000   0.0000    0.7500   0.1250     0.1250
                     0.5000   -0.5000   0.5000    0.5000   0.5000     0.0000
                     0.2500    0.0000   0.0000    0.2500   0.0000     0.7500
                     0.2500    0.0000   0.0000    0.2500   0.7500     0.7500
                     0.2500    0.0000   0.0000    0.2500   0.0000     0.0000
                     0.2500    0.0000   0.0000    0.2500   0.7500     0.0000




                          Figure 7.11   Another snowflake-like fractal
108   Aﬃne Transformation Fractals



                       a.       b.        c.         d.        e.       f.
                       0.3333   0.0000    0.0000     0.5000    0.0000   0.0000
                       0.3333   0.0000    0.0000     0.5000    0.3333   0.0000
                       0.3333   0.0000    0.0000     0.5000    0.6667   0.0000
                       0.3333   0.0000    0.0000     0.5000    0.6667   0.5000
                      -0.3333   0.0000    0.0000    -0.5000    0.6667   0.5000
                      -0.3333   0.0000    0.0000    -0.5000    1.0000   0.5000




        Figure 7.12    The Devil’s Staircase: This fractal is closely related to Cantor’s set.


                      a.        b.        c.        d.        e.        f.
                      0.0000    0.5770   -0.5770    0.0000    0.0951    0.5893
                      0.0000    0.5770   -0.5770    0.0000    0.4413    0.7893
                      0.0000    0.5770   -0.5770    0.0000    0.0952    0.9893




                                  Figure 7.13      A fractal island
109   Aﬃne Transformation Fractals



                     a.        b.         c.       d.        e.       f.
                     0.2500    0.0000     0.0000   0.9000    0.3750   0.0000
                     0.6500    0.0000     0.0000   0.7500    0.1750   0.2500
                     0.0000   -0.5000     0.2500   0.0000    0.5000   0.2000
                     0.0000    0.5000    -0.2500   0.0000    0.5000   0.4500




                                     Figure 7.14   A pine tree


                     a.        b.         c.        d.       e.       f.
                     0.1950   -0.4880     0.3440    0.4430   0.4431   0.2453
                     0.4620    0.4140    -0.2520    0.3610   0.2511   0.5692
                    -0.0580   -0.0700     0.4530   -0.1110   0.5976   0.0969
                    -0.0350    0.0700    -0.4690   -0.0220   0.4884   0.5069
                    -0.6370    0.0000     0.0000    0.5010   0.8562   0.2513




                                  Figure 7.15      Another tree
110   Aﬃne Transformation Fractals




                     a.        b.        c.         d.        e.       f.
                     0.3870    0.4300    0.4300    -0.3870    0.2560   0.5220
                     0.4410   -0.0910   -0.0090    -0.3220    0.4219   0.5059
                    -0.4680    0.0200   -0.1130     0.0150    0.4000   0.4000




                                     Figure 7.16     A twig



                     a.        b.        c.        d.         e.       f.
                     0.5000    0.0000    0.0000    0.7500     0.2500   0.0000
                     0.2500   -0.2000    0.1000    0.3000     0.2500   0.5000
                     0.2500    0.2000   -0.1000    0.3000     0.5000   0.4000
                     0.2000    0.0000    0.0000    0.3000     0.4000   0.5500




                                     Figure 7.17    A weed
8   The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets




         The universe is full of magical things patiently waiting for our wits to grow sharper.
                                                                             — Eden Phillpots


      Beauty is the first test; there is no permanent place in the world for ugly mathematics.
                                                                               — G. H. Hardy




    In Part I of this book, we looked into the properties of sets of natural numbers. In
    Part II, we have been looking at some special sets of real numbers. In this chapter
    we will expand our scope to include sets of complex numbers. Natural number
    sets and real number sets are really two diﬀerent types of beasts entirely, which is
    to say that mathematically they really shouldn’t be compared with one another.
    Moreover, since it is possible to encode an infinite number of natural numbers into
    a single real number, an infinite set of real numbers introduces us to a whole new
    level of infinity.
        Despite this hazard, there is an intuitive theme from Chapter 3 that will be
    continued in this chapter. Recall that at best we could only enumerate members of
    RE sets and that we could never be sure if something was not a member of an RE
    set in the general case. Similarly, if we consider a CO-RE set, then at best we can
    only enumerate numbers that are not members of the CO-RE set. This would seem
    to imply that any attempt to visualize what these sets look like would be doomed
    to failure. However, this is not necessarily the case, for in this chapter we are going
    to examine complex number sets that have this same sort of pathological quality
    but are subject to being approximated in the sense that taking an educated guess
    at the set membership of a complex number will still produce an enlightening image
    for us.
        What all of this means will become clearer as we continue. But before we dive
    into the nonlinear fractals that are the subject of this chapter, we need to take a
    brief look at iterative dynamical systems. This will be followed by an introduction
    to complex numbers. Afterwards, we will examine the Mandelbrot and Julia sets,
    which are sets of complex numbers defined by iterative processes.
112          The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets


                                                         ✗✔
                                                            c
                                                         ✖✕

                                                            ❄
                                ✗✔                                               ✗✔
                                  xt         ✲      xt+1 = f (xt , c)           ✲ xt+1
                                ✖✕                                               ✖✕
                                 ✻




                                       Figure 8.1   Recursion in iterative functions


8.1 Iterative Dynamical Systems
             The focus of much of this chapter is a deceptively simple iterative process described
             by Figure 8.1. The process begins with a starting value for x0 and a constant value
             for c. At the next time step we compute x1 by plugging x0 and c into f (·), then we
             compute x2 with x1 and c, and so on.
                 Notice that this is similar to how we recursively expanded the L-system strings
             in Chapter 6 and the aﬃne transformations in Chapter 7. However, instead of using
             real valued numbers or vectors for the x terms and c, we will use complex numbers,
             which form a superset of the real numbers. The need for complex numbers in
             mathematics arises from the fact that the square root function has no real number
                                                                                         √
             solution for negative arguments. We know from basic algebra that if x = y, then
             x2 = y. But what number squared is equal to a negative number? Mathematicians
             solve this problem by defining a special imaginary number, i, as being equal to
             √
               −1. Algebraic consistency is maintained by allowing for the fact that i2 = −1.


8.2 Complex Numbers
             A complex number consists of the pair (a + ib) where a and b are real numbers
             and a is known as the real part while ib is known as the imaginary part.1 Complex
             numbers can be added and multiplied by the rules
                                  (a + ib) + (c + id) =         (a + c) + i(b + d)
                                  (a + ib) × (c + id) =         (ac − bd) + i(ad + bc).
             In the addition rule we simply add the real parts of the two operands to get the real
             part of the result and add the imaginary parts of the operands to get the imaginary
               1 Imaginary numbers are just as “real” as real numbers are. They are frequently used in physics

             and engineering to describe natural phenomena.
113   The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets



        Iterative Methods for Computing Roots                                          Digression 8.1

         It is not too diﬃcult to imagine how a computer computes functions that involve
         addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. In fact, the techniques used in
         computers to carry out the basic mathematical operations are not too diﬀerent from
         how you and I compute them with pencil and paper. But how would you compute
         the cube root of a number? There is a surprisingly simple yet eﬃcient technique
         for computing roots (square, cube, or whatever) that dates back to Newton and is
         known as Newton’s method for finding the values in which an equation equals 0. We
         can use Newton’s method for finding the cube root of 2 by noting that the equation
                                                       1
         f (x) = x3 − 2 is equal to 0 only when x = ±2 3 . To use Newton’s method we iterate
         the equation
                                                f (x)        x3 − 2
                                    xt+1 = xt − ′     = xt −        ,
                                                f (x)          3x2
         where f (x) is defined as above and f ′ (x) is the first derivative of f (x) with respect to
         x. All that remains is for us to make an initial guess for x0 , which we will take as 1.
         The table below prints the first few iterates of Newton’s method.

                         t    xt                              x3t
                         1    1.33333333333333333333          2.37037037037037037034
                         2    1.26388888888888888890          2.01895522548010973941
                         3    1.25993349344997696647          2.00005925932265425012
                         4    1.25992105001776977374          2.00000000058525861914
                         5    1.25992104989487316479          2.00000000000000000009

         Notice how the number of accurate digits doubles after each iteration. This attribute,
         known as quadratic convergence, makes Newton’s method a powerful technique for
         approximating many functions over the real numbers.




      part. The multiplication rule is very similar to the way you would multiply two
      simple sums with the algebraic distributive rule, but notice that the −bd portion
      comes from multiplying ib × id = −1 × bd; thus, it is possible to multiply two
      imaginary numbers and get a strictly real result.
          Also notice that if we make the imaginary parts of two complex numbers equal to
      0, then addition and multiplication will take on the standard form for real numbers.
      Thus, complex arithmetic encompasses all of what one could do with real numbers
      as well.2 Since the real numbers can be placed on a line, it is often convenient to
         2 Incidentally, the cardinality of the set of complex numbers is the same as the cardinality of the

      real numbers. To see this, consider the complex number (a+ib) = (a1 a2 a3 · · ·+i×b1 b2 b3 · · ·) where
      the list is a decimal expansion. We can interleave the two decimal expansions as a1 b1 a2 b2 a3 b3 · · ·
      to map a complex number into a real number.
114         The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets




                           • For each number, c, in a subset of the complex plane
                                • Set x0 = 0
                                • For t = 1 to tmax
                                     • Compute xt = x2t + c
                                     • If |xt | > 2, then break out of loop
                                • If t < tmax, then color point c white
                                • If t = tmax, then color point c black



                                Table 8.1    Pseudo-code to compute the M-set


            think of the complex number as occupying a place on what is known as the complex
            plane. To locate the point a + ib on the complex plane, we place the real part on
            the x-axis, and the imaginary part on the y-axis.


8.3 The Mandelbrot Set
            Now that we know how to add and multiply complex numbers, we can go back
            to looking at the function xt+1 = f (xt , c), which we will take as having the form
            xt+1 = x2t + c with x0 = 0 + i0 = 0. The question that we want to answer is: For
            some constant complex value of c, what will happen to xt as we let t go to infinity?
            Let’s look at a few special cases. When c = 0, all of the xt values will always be
            equal to 0; thus it is possible for the xt values to remain bounded in size as t gets
            very large. Similarly, if we set c = i, then x0 = 0, x1 = i, x2 = −1 + i, x3 = −i,
            x4 = −1 + i, and x5 = −i. Since x3 = x5 , the sequence has fallen into a period-2
            pattern, meaning that it oscillates between two values, −i and −1 + i.
                For other values of c, things are not so simple. When c = 1 + i, the sequence
            becomes 0, 1 + i, 1 + i3, −7 + i7, 1 − i97, −9407 − i193, 88454401 + i3631103, . . ., and
            keeps growing in size. In such a case, we say that the sequence diverges. We really
            want to know what values of c will make the sequence diverge and what values of c
            will keep the sequence bounded. This is not such an easy question to answer. For
            example, we know that for c = i the sequence remains bounded. However, if we
            slightly alter that choice for c to be equal to 0.01 + i, we get the sequence 0, 0.01 + 1,
            −0.9899 + i1.02, . . ., 111.001311 + i57.871075, . . ., which again grows unbounded.
            In general, if a2 + b2 is greater than 4 (where xt = a + ib), then we can be sure that
            the sequence will diverge; however, there exists an infinite number of points on the
            complex plane that will hover around this threshold for quite a while and exceed
            it only after a large number of steps. Moreover, as should be clear from the last
            sequence that we looked at, for any two values of c that are close to each other, it
            is not at all clear if one can conclude that one sequence will be bounded or diverge
115   The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets



      based on how the other sequence behaved. Thus, the simple function x2t + c is more
      than deceptively simple—it is downright diabolical.
          Benoit Mandelbrot was the first person to study the function x2t +c in great detail
      with a computer. To see just how pathological this iterative equation is, Mandelbrot
      wrote a simple program that performed the algorithm shown in Table 8.1.
          In the algorithm, the expression |xt | denotes the length of the vector
                                                                              √      formed
      by the complex number xt , which is computed as |xt | = |a + bi| = a2 + b2 . As
      mentioned earlier, it is possible to prove that if the length of the complex number
      exceeds 2, then the sequence will grow to infinity. Since Mandelbrot was interested
      in the set of points that remained bounded, he knew that if one of his iterated
      complex numbers exceeded 2 in length, then it was not in his set. But how could he
      tell if a complex number was in his set, that is, how could he ever determine that
      a complex number would remain bounded after an infinite number of iterations?
      Mandelbrot was fairly certain that there was no general way of answering this
      question, so he made a simple compromise: If the iterate was still less than 2 in
      length after some predetermined number of iterations, then he would assume that
      it was in his set. Thus, in the algorithm he iterated the function f (·) only a total
      of tmax times. The first image that Mandelbrot produced looked something like
      what is shown in Figure 8.2.
          When one tries to visualize a set of natural, real, or complex numbers that has
      some mathematical property it is usually the case that one imagines the set to be
      somehow “cold” because it represents a mathematical truth. Yet, the Mandelbrot
      set (or M-set) is distinctly . . . organic. Notice that it looks like an island with
      smaller islets along the perimeter and that it has tendrils extending from the edges.
      Mandelbrot’s first reaction to seeing the M-set was that either a mistake had been
      made in performing the computations or the detail of the image was some sort of
      artifact of the way his computer produced the sequence of iterates.




                                Figure 8.2    The Mandelbrot set
116   The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets




      Figure 8.3 The Mandelbrot Set: Moving from left to right and top to bottom each
      subsequent image shows the boxed region from the previous image in greater detail.
117   The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets




      Figure 8.4 Another view of the Mandelbrot set: Zooming into the Mandelbrot set from
      another direction yields small but distorted versions of the whole set.
118         The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets



                For further study Mandelbrot decided to enlarge portions of the image by con-
            sidering only a smaller area but at a higher resolution. One possible outcome
            could have been that the M-set could have well-defined boundaries and, therefore,
            it would lose much of its detail under magnification. Figure 8.3 shows six images of
            the M-set at various magnifications. In the first image we see a global view of the
            M-set with the upper-left corner being at −2.4 + i1.4 and the lower-right corner at
            1.34 − i1.4. The small box in each of the first five images indicates what portion
            has been enlarged in the subsequent plot.
                As you can see, as we zoom into the M-set, the detail does not diminish but
            instead becomes richer and more varied. The second image dives into the upper
            valley between the main body of the M-set and the largest islet. In the third image,
            we zoom into one of the buds that seem to have spiral-like filaments hanging oﬀ
            their tops. The fourth and fifth images illustrate the logarithmic nature of the
            spirals, and the sixth image shows that the “hairs” of the spirals are quite beautiful
            themselves. In the last picture, we have zoomed in by a factor of more than 12,000.
            In fact, we could zoom into the M-set forever, always finding more and more novel
            detail.
                Yet zooming into certain areas of the M-set can lead to a feeling of déjà vu, as
            illustrated in Figure 8.4. The first plot once again shows the whole view of the
            M-set but has a box on one of the little buds on the perimeter of the largest islet to
            indicate where the next image comes from. When we enlarge the little bud, we find
            that it has what look like rivers extending from the main body. Zooming into one
            of the streams reveals several miniature versions of the M-set, yet each miniature
            version is a subtle distortion of the original.


8.4 The M-Set and Computability
            The Mandelbrot set is a set of complex numbers; thus, it is not really comparable
            in rigorous terms with a set of natural numbers. However, in this section we will
            dispense with the formality so that we can compare the Mandelbrot set with some
            of the sets that we discovered in Chapter 3. Also note that we haven’t actually been
            looking at the “real” Mandelbrot set but only an approximation as computed by a
            program, since the real Mandelbrot set is defined as the points that never diverge.
            All of the images in this chapter were computed by a program that is similar to the
            simple algorithm given earlier in the chapter; thus, each point that we have labeled
            as being in the Mandelbrot set (the black points) was really only found to have an
            iterate less than 2 in length after a fixed number of iterations.
                The really important question is: How do we know that some point that we
            labeled as being in the Mandelbrot set really is? Looking back at any of the figures
            that contain the whole of the M-set, we can subdivide the image into a few subsets.
            The largest, kidney-shaped portion of the M-set is known as a cardioid (which
119   The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets




                     Figure 8.5    Progressively more complex M-set subsets


      means “heart-shaped”) and can be described by the parametric equations

                                              1
                                   x =          (2 cos t − cos 2t)
                                              4
                                              1
                                    y     =     (2 sin t − sin 2t)
                                              4
      where t takes the values from 0 to 2π. Thus, if we wanted to draw a very rough
      sketch of the M-set, we could check to see if a point is within the cardioid defined
      by the equations above. It would also be possible to have another equation for the
      largest circle just to the left of the cardioid and two more equations for the smaller
      circles just above and below the cardioid. Figure 8.5 shows three stages in making
      successively more accurate rough sketches of the M-set.
          Our rough sketches are not too bad for a start. Looking closely at some of the
      more complete images, we can see that there are many smaller circles that surround
      the perimeter at fairly regular intervals. We could also include these smaller circles
      in our next rough sketch to make it more complete. However, no matter how hard
      we try, there is always going to be something missing from our rough sketch.
          Does all of this sound familiar? It should. Looking back at the complement of the
      halting set, we can “draw” a similar rough sketch of a CO-RE set by enumerating
      some well-known members, such as the Stutter function that always diverges (set
      ’f (lambda () (f))) or a Stutter function that attempts to take the car of the
      result of a divergent recursive function call (set ’f (lambda () (car (f)))),
      and so on. We could list an infinite number of these obvious members of a CO-
      RE set because we’ve figured an algorithm to enumerate a recursive subset of the
      CO-RE set.
          What members will we fail to enumerate? Restating the question: For what
      members of a CO-RE set is there no clear method of enumerating the members? In
      many ways the members of a CO-RE set that are impossible to decide are the ones
      that are near a threshold or border. Programs that we can consider as being on the
      “edge” of halting are never trivial and usually encompass some deep mathematical
120          The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets



             truth. For example, one could write a program that attempts to disprove Fermat’s
             last theorem3 (FLT) by looking for positive integer solutions to the equation xn +
             y n = z n for n > 2. We could write this program so that it exhaustively searches
             every possible integer combination, so that if a solution to the equation exists then
             the program will find it. Deciding if this program halts is equivalent to proving the
             status of Fermat’s last theorem, which is clearly nontrivial.
                 Also note that either our FLT program halts or it does not. This statement
             is obvious, but the implication is that if FLT is true, then another program that
             mindlessly outputs “Your FLT program will not halt” correctly decides halting
             set membership for the FLT program. If, on the other hand, FLT is false, then
             another program that mindlessly outputs “Your FLT program will halt with a
             counterexample” will correctly decide halting set membership. We don’t know
             which program is correct, but we do know that one of them does output the correct
             result. Thus, deciding halting set membership for the FLT program alone is not
             impossible, since one of the two stupid programs above does the trick. What is
             impossible is to write a program that can decide if any program halts; not just one,
             or a finite number, or even a recursive subset of the halting set, but any program.
                 Turning our attention back to the M-set, on the perimeter we can see many
             fuzzy details. At one level of resolution our program may have placed a black
             dot to indicate that the point is in the M-set. But if one expands this point and
             magnifies the surrounding areas (as done in some of our images), our single plain
             point has turned into a forest of detail. Is the point in the M-set or not? If you stay
             suﬃciently near the edge, you can repeatedly magnify the M-set to find an infinite
             amount of detail, but if you play it safe and stay either within the main cardioid or
             completely outside the circle of radius 2, then you can decide definitively if a point
             is in the M-set or not. Again, just as with the CO-RE sets, the diﬃculty in deciding
             membership comes when we attempt to live on the edge. This is where all of the
             beauty is found as well.


8.5 The M-Set as the Master Julia Set
             To compute the M-set, we iterated xt+1 = x2t + c with x0 = 0 to see if c was in the
             M-set or not. Let’s make a subtle change in this procedure and consider a related
             family of sets known as Julia sets. We say “family” because instead of computing
             one image, we will use a single equation that can be used to produce an infinite
             number of images that are closely related to the M-set. The iterative equation that
             we will use will still be xt+1 = x2t + c; however, instead of using c to denote the
             complex number that we are deciding membership for, we will keep c constant and
                3 During the writing of this book, Andrew Wiles of Princeton University succeeded in proving

             Fermat’s last theorem.
121   The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets




                   • Set c to some constant complex value.
                   • For each number, x0 , in a subset of the complex plane
                        • For t = 1 to tmax
                             • Compute xt = x2t + c
                             • If |xt | > 2, then break out of loop
                        • If t < tmax, then color point c white
                        • If t = tmax, then color point c black



                           Table 8.2      Pseudo-code to compute J-sets




                          (a)                                         (b)


                      Figure 8.6   Two Julia sets: (a) c = i, (b) c = 0.01 + i


      set x0 equal to the point on the complex plane that we wish to check. Our new
      Julia set algorithm will look something like the algorithm in Table 8.2.
          Figure 8.6 shows two Julia sets for two diﬀerent values of c. For the image on the
      left, we used c = i, which we know is inside the M-set because it led to a period-2
      pattern. On the right, we used c = 0.01 + i, which we know is outside of the M-set
      because it diverges. There are several interesting facts about these two images.
      First, each image contains at least some sort of symmetry about a diagonal, in that
      one half of the image looks like the mirror image of the other. Next, each image is
      somewhat self-similar, since the portions of the Julia sets look like smaller versions
      of the whole. However, the most important fact about the two images is that they
      diﬀer in that the left image is connected while the right image is composed of a
      “dust” and is not connected.
122   The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets




      Figure 8.7   The Julia set that corresponds to the midpoint of the sixth image in Fig-
      ure 8.3


          For convenience, let’s refer to the Julia set corresponding to some choice of c
      as Jc . Gaston Julia, who studied iterative equations long before computers could
      be used to calculate the corresponding images, proved in 1918 that if the equation
      xt+1 = x2t +c diverges, then the Julia set Jc would be dust-like and unconnected, but
      if the iterates stayed bounded, then Jc would be connected. Putting this together
      with our knowledge of how the M-set is computed, we see that the M-set consists
      of exactly those points for which Jc is connected. Thus, we can think of the M-set
      as a table of contents for all Julia sets. Ask the question “Is some Jc connected?”
      and the answer is “Is c in the M-set?” Mandelbrot himself knew of Julia’s work,
      and his motivation for discovering the M-set was to visualize which Julia sets were
      connected or unconnected.
          Yet, there is more to the M-set then just that. For example, look at the sixth
      image in Figure 8.3. The Julia set that is computed with c being equal to the
      midpoint of that portion of the M-set is shown in Figure 8.7. Notice how the Julia
      set has the same sort of motif as the portion of the M-set it is derived from. This
      similarity is no coincidence, as is illustrated in the next few pages. Figure 8.8
      contains a global view of the M-set with various regions of the perimeter boxed and
      labeled. In Figure 8.9 the boxed regions of the M-set are enlarged and the Julia set
      that corresponds to the center point of the box is shown alongside the enlargement
      of the M-set.
123   The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets




                      Figure 8.8   A map to the M-set images in Figure 8.9
124   The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets



        Mandelbrot (a)       Julia (a)             Mandelbrot (b)       Julia (b)




        Mandelbrot (c)       Julia (c)             Mandelbrot (d)       Julia (d)




        Mandelbrot (e)       Julia (e)             Mandelbrot (f)       Julia (f)




        Mandelbrot (g)       Julia (g)             Mandelbrot (h)       Julia (h)




        Mandelbrot (i)       Julia (i)             Mandelbrot (j)       Julia (j)




        Mandelbrot (k)       Julia (k)             Mandelbrot (l)       Julia (l)




      Figure 8.9 Enlargements of the M-set with the Julia set that corresponds to the center-
      point of the M-set image
125          The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets



                Some of the Julia sets from Figure 8.9 are connected and others are unconnected.
             A simple litmus test of the connectedness is to see if the center point of the M-set
             image is black or not. Sometimes this fact will be clear, but not always. The tendrils
             that extend away from the perimeter of the M-set have a very distinctive pattern,
             and in general the corresponding Julia sets comply with the motif of the portion of
             the M-set they are derived from.


8.6 Other Mysteries of the M-Set
             In 1991 David Boll made a fascinating discovery regarding the M-set and the con-
             stant π. Boll was trying to confirm that the “neck” of the M-set at c = − 43 + 0i
             (where the largest circle on the left meets the main cardioid) is actually 0 in thick-
             ness. Boll set his program to test values of c in the form − 34 + ϵi, where ϵ is some
             small number. He constructed a table of values for ϵ and the number of iterations
             it took for the iterates to diverge. A partial list of the values he computed is shown
             below.
                                           ϵ            Iterations
                                           0.1                  33
                                           0.01                315
                                           0.001              3143
                                           0.0001            31417
                                           0.00001          314160
                                           0.000001        3141593
                                           0.0000001      31415928

                 Do the values in the right column look familiar? In Boll’s words, “What the hell
             is π doing here?” Multiplying ϵ and the corresponding number of iterations gives an
             approximation of π that is within ±ϵ. Notice that nowhere in the M-set algorithm
             does the number π appear. Instead, the value “emerges” as a higher-order pattern
             on its own. It is not at all clear whether or not someone could have predicted that
             the M-set contains the value of π without numerically exploring the M-set in great
             detail. Other locations of the M-set may yield similar surprises, and not all of them
             have been explained.


8.7 Further Exploration
             As you can see, the M-set and Julia sets come in a rich variety of forms; from
             dendritic spikes to snowflake dusts. The images in this chapter only scratch the
             surface of all of the infinite Julia sets that can be found. For further study, the
             reader can use the programs mandel and julia to find new and unexplored regions
             of the M-set and the Julia sets.
126   The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets



           Option Name         Option Type     Option Meaning
           -width              integer         width of the plot in pixels
           -height             integer         height of the plot in pixels
           -levels             integer         number of plot (gray) levels
           -maxit              integer         maximum number of iterations
           -bail               double          value of |x| to end iteration
           -ulx                double          upper-left corner x-coordinate
           -uly                double          upper-left corner y-coordinate
           -lly                double          lower-left corner y-coordinate
           -box                integer         line width for a box
           -bulx               double          box’s upper-left x-coordinate
           -buly               double          box’s upper-left y-coordinate
           -blly               double          box’s lower-left y-coordinate
           -idiv               integer         iteration divisor
           -rev                switch          reverse all colors but first?
           -inv                switch          invert all colors?
           -xmag               integer         magnification factor for X Windows
           -term               string          how to plot points

           Options Only for julia
           -cr              double             real component of c
           -ci              double             imaginary component of c


                   Table 8.3   The command-line options for mandel and julia


         Both mandel and julia take nearly identical command-line options. The only
      diﬀerence between them is that julia accepts two extra options that will be ex-
      plained later. Thus, this brief tutorial will mostly concentrate on the features
      common to both programs. A full list of options is contained in Table 8.3.
         The width and height of the plots that you create can be set with the -width
      and -height options. The values that you can use for these options may depend
      on the plotting device used. All of the images in this chapter were produced with
      only two levels of gray-scale (black and white), so that the images could be printed
      easily. However, if you run mandel or julia with a plotting device that can accept
      many levels of shading (such as X Windows, Linux SVGA, or the PGM file format,
      as determined by the -term option), then you may wish to set the number of gray-
      levels to some other value with the -levels option.
         The maximum number of iterations to be used is controlled with the -maxit
      option. All points that never exceed the magnitude specified by -bail within the
      maximum number of iterations will be represented by gray points as determined by
      these options.
127          The Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets



                 If you wish to zoom into diﬀerent areas, then the -ulx, -uly, and -lly options
             can be used to determine the upper-left and lower-left corners of the viewing area.
             Notice that only the y-coordinate is specified for the lower-left corner. We don’t
             need to specify the x-coordinate, since this is already determined by the -ulx option.
             Similarly, the rightmost edge of the image is predetermined by these options.
                 The -bulx, -buly, and -blly options specify corners of a box in a way similar
             to the options above. However, the corners determined by these options are used
             to draw a box with a width determined by the -box option. If the width is set to
             0, then no box is drawn. These options are useful if you wish to highlight a subset
             of the image that you will later zoom into.
                 With the -idiv option you can divide the gray-scale map used for the image
             into several diﬀerent bands. The eﬀect is diﬃcult to explain; however, with a little
             bit of trial and error you should be able to see exactly what the option does. The
             -rev option can be used to invert all of the gray-scale colors except black. Again,
             this option is best explored and not explained.
                 For computing Julia set images, recall that there is a unique Julia set for each
             value of the c parameter. The value of c used for a particular Julia set can be fixed
             with the -cr and -ci options, which set the real and imaginary components of c,
             respectively.


8.8 Further Reading
              Hirst, B. & Mandelbrot, B. (1995). Fractal landscapes from the real world. New
              York: Distributed Art Publishers.
              Mandelbrot, B. (1983). The fractal geometry of nature. New York: W. H. Freeman.
              Peitgen, H.-O., Jürgens, H., & Saupe, D. (1992). Chaos and fractals. New York:
              Springer-Verlag.
              Pickover, C. A. (1991). Computers, pattern, chaos and beauty: Graphics from an
              unseen world. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
9   Postscript: Fractals




         It is indeed a surprising and fortunate fact that nature can be expressed by relatively
                                                             low-order mathematical functions.
                                                                             — Rudolf Carnap


        Everything you’ve learned in school as “obvious” becomes less and less obvious as you
    begin to study the universe. For example, there are no solids in the universe. There’s not
      even a suggestion of a solid. There are no absolute continuums. There are no surfaces.
                                                                   There are no straight lines.
                                                                     — R. Buckminster Fuller


                                                       Mathematics is the science of patterns.
                                                                       — Lynn Arthur Steen




    Computer programs have a dual identity that is an artifact of a trade-oﬀ
    between time and space. From one viewpoint, and in the static sense, a stored
    computer program can be thought of as a compact recipe for distinguishing be-
    tween numbers that do and do not belong to some specific set. From the opposite
    viewpoint, and in the dynamic sense, a running program is a flowing process that
    enumerates members of a set, one after another. This diﬀerence can be appreciated
    with the example set that can be described by “all prime numbers that are one less
    than a perfect power of 2” or enumerated as the infinite set of numbers that starts
    out {3, 7, 31, 127, 8191, 131071, 524287, . . .}. While the verbal description is a
    perfect representation of the infinite set in that it contains a suﬃcient amount of
    information to enable one to enumerate an arbitrary number of members, it would
    still take an infinite amount of computational time to perform the task. Hence, while
    the verbal description is finite in length but requires infinite time to “unwind,” the
    enumerated set requires infinite space to store it but exists independently of time.
        Fractals, both deterministic and stochastic, derive from special types of programs
    that exhibit this same duality. Natural fractals—such as branching and folding
    structures found in biological systems and the random patterns in mountain ranges
130           Postscript: Fractals



              and river basins—are often structurally elaborate to such a degree that they are
              diﬃcult to describe with classical geometry. Yet, in many cases, a fractal structure
              will have a simple underlying functional cause. For biological systems this cause
              is usually related to parallel growth processes and the need to optimize conflicting
              goals, such as surface area and building material usage, while stochastic fractals
              often result from a single parallel process that occurs on multiple spatial scales,
              such as erosion. Thus, the structural recursion of a fractal will always be related to
              a functional recursion that takes place in the creation of the natural fractal.
                  In this second postscript chapter we will see how fractals relate to many of
              the computational issues discussed in Part I. In particular, we will see how some
              of the stochastic and deterministic fractals that we examined in this part can be
              viewed as canonical examples of “almost simple” things under two very diﬀerent
              but reasonable definitions of simplicity. Examining simplicity in this way will give
              us insight into what it means for something to be truly complex.


9.1 Algorithmic Regularity as Simplicity
              Our first attempt at a definition for “simplicity” is related to the idea that things
              that can be compressed are simpler than things that cannot. This has relevance to
              scientific methodology because a scientist’s principal job is to give explanations for
              phenomena that are simpler than the phenomena they describe. For example, the
              number of chemicals and chemical reactions is so staggeringly large that without
              any knowledge of atomic structure, chemistry looks a lot like magic. But with an
              understanding of atomic structure and how atoms bind to each other, it becomes
              possible not only to understand individual reactions but also to conceive of new
              chemical compounds that have never existed before. In this case, a scientific model
              of atomic structure has been used to compress much of the complexity of chemistry.
              Thus, compression can be thought of as a way of building models to explain more
              complex things.
                  The formal study of how things can be algorithmically compressed is known as
              Algorithmic Complexity (AC).1 AC is a relatively new field that was independently
              pioneered by Ray Solomonoﬀ, Andrei Kolmogorov, and Gregory Chaitin.2 To better
              appreciate AC, recall from Chapter 3 that the time complexity of an algorithm is a
              bound on the amount of time that it takes to compute a function for some particular
              input length. Similarly, the space complexity is used to characterize the amount
              of computer memory that an algorithm will need at any time during its execution.
                 1 The topic of AC goes by a number of diﬀerent names but is often referred as “Kolmogorov

              Complexity” in academic circles. I am using “Algorithmic Complexity” instead, since this name
              seems to better indicate what the topic is about to the uninitiated.
                 2 Amazingly, Chaitin was just fifteen years old when he started working on defining AC. He

              published his first results at the age of nineteen.
131   Postscript: Fractals


                                        AC Measure
        ✛                                                                                  ✲
        Low Information Content                            High Information Content
        High Compressibility                                    Low Compressibility
        Orderly                                                            Random

             Figure 9.1      AC in terms of information, compressibility, and randomness


      Like time complexity, space complexity is given as a function of the length of the
      input.
          AC diﬀers from these other two complexity measures in that it is not always
      concerned with how long it takes to compute a function or how much memory
      is required, just as long as both are finite. Instead, in AC the central issue is the
      required length of a program to produce a set of numbers or symbols. As an example
      similar to but simpler than the one found in the opening of this chapter, suppose
      you were interested in the first n even natural numbers. One way of storing this
      information would be to sequentially list each number that you wanted to remember:
      0, 2, 4, 6, 8, . . ., (2n − 2). For large values of n a more eﬃcient storage technique
      would be to store a program fragment that could reproduce the desired set of
      numbers:
                     for(i = 0; i < n; i++) printf("%d\n", i * 2);
      The one constraint that we place on programs of this nature is that they must take
      no input, that is, we require that all of the information needed to reproduce the set
      must be in the program itself; thus, in the C program fragment above, we would
      really need to replace the variable, n, by the hard-coded limit of the number of
      even numbers in our set. How much information is in a consecutive sequence of
      even numbers? After replacing n with the limit, the length of the program will
      always grow proportionally to O(log n), since n can be represented by a character
      sequence of length log n + 1 and everything else in the program is independent of
      n. This means that if you used the values 10, 100, 1000, . . ., 1,000,000 for n, you
      could compress the set of numbers down to a length of approximately 2, 3, 4, . . ., 7,
      respectively (plus the extra three-dozen or so characters required for the rest of the
      code fragment), which is a remarkable compression rate. Going back to the earlier
      discussion on time and space, AC tells us exactly how much one can be traded for
      another, that is, if you can’t actually store a large set of numbers in a computer’s
      memory, then AC tells us that a portion of the space in memory can be replaced
      with computational time if we are willing to make the sacrifice that the set would
      have to be reconstructed on the fly.
         Thus, AC formalizes what it means for a set of numbers to be compressible and
      incompressible. Data that are redundant or that can be more easily described than
132           Postscript: Fractals



              enumerated—like the set of even numbers—contain relatively little information;
              therefore, one can compress sets like this into something of a smaller size. Data
              that have no clear pattern and defy algorithmic description are incompressible.
              This notion of incompressibility yields a nice description of what it means for data
              to be random. If there is no discernible relationship between numbers in a set,
              then they are most likely statistically independent of each other and are therefore
              random. Figure 9.1 illustrates all of these characteristics in terms of AC.3


9.2 Stochastic Irregularity as Simplicity
              One failing of AC is that it defies intuition to a certain extent; after all, most
              people would not necessarily associate randomness with complexity. In fact, some
              forms of randomness can be considered simple, since a collection of purely random
              events can often be statistically characterized very concisely. Complementary to
              this, moderately “simple” things from an AC point of view often have complicated
              statistical descriptions. This would seem to imply that AC and statistical com-
              plexity are somewhat incompatible. To get at the heart of what it really means
              for something to be “simple,” we will consider how many random things can be
              compactly described.
                  As we saw in Chapter 5, a fair coin toss can be used to generate a type of random
              walk by letting the outcome of two coin tosses be mapped to the four compass
              directions. We can simplify a random walk considerably by constraining the moves
              to only the left and right directions, thus limiting the walker to a one-dimensional
              line instead of a two-dimensional plane. This process can be conceptually simplified
              even further by noting that the position of a random walker relative to its origin
              will always be equal to a sum of random numbers such that each random number
              is either -1 or +1. Hence, by mapping heads to +1 and tails to -1, a random walk
              of n steps can be simulated by taking the sum of n ±1 random numbers.
                  For large values of n—say, on the order of thousands or more—what will typical
              sums of ±1 random numbers look like? Clearly, if we are using a fair coin toss, on
              average there will be as many heads as tails, which means that a random walker
              will stay relatively close to the origin. For a random walker to be significantly to
              the left or right, there must be a skewed number of heads or tails in the coin tosses,
              which, while possible, is very improbable.
                  3 Regarding the topic of compression and AC, an informal contest took place on the USENET

              newsgroup comp.lang.c to see who could come up with the shortest program that produced the
              song “1 little, 2 little, 3 little Indians . . .” complete with the final line “. . . 10 little Indian boys.”
              The whole song has 133 text characters in it. Using the compression program gzip, it is possible to
              compress this down to 83 bytes. However, one entry consisted of a cryptic program that contained a
              mere 78 characters that faithfully reproduces the whole song. Interestingly, attempting to compress
              the 78 byte program with gzip yields a file that is 109 bytes in size. Since the “compressed” file
              is larger than the original file, the file is incompressible as far as gzip is concerned.
133   Postscript: Fractals




              (a)                                                 (b)


      Figure
          √ 9.2 Gaussian distributions (a) from random coin tosses and (b) from the equation
      (1/σ 2π) exp(−(x − µ)2 /2σ 2 )


          If we were to generate several million random walks, each walk consisting of
      thousands of steps, we could take note of the final resting position of the random
      walkers and plot a histogram of these positions. Figure 9.2a shows such a histogram,
      with the center of the plot representing a final position of 0 (meaning that the left
      and right moves canceled out). As can be seen, the plot is very close to a true
      normal bellcurve, otherwise known as a Gaussian distribution. Figure 9.2b shows
      the smooth curve plotted from the actual Gaussian function. Clearly, the two graphs
      are very similar. Had we increased the number of walks and the lengths of the walks,
      the two curves would have approached each other to the point that they would be
      visibly indistinguishable.
          The curves graphically show how likely it is for a particular outcome to occur
      with the random walker. The most likely case is that the random walker will end
      up at or near the starting point. Slightly less likely, but still very possible, is that
      the walker will end up just to the left or just to the right. As the final distance
      from the origin increases, the probability that the random walker will end up at
      that distance diminishes. To end up at one of the absolute extremes requires that a
      thousand coin tosses come up with a thousand heads or a thousand tails in a row,
      which is for all practical purposes impossible.
          Gaussian curves like those shown in Figure 9.2 have many useful statistical
      properties. First and foremost, they are unimodal, meaning that they have a single
      peak, so that knowing where the center of the distribution is located tells you a
      great deal about every point in the distribution. Second, Gaussian distributions
      also have a well-defined standard deviation, which is the average amount that all of
      the points deviate from the center of the distribution. With a standard deviation
134          Postscript: Fractals



             of s, typically 68 percent of all points in the distribution will fall between −s and
             +s. A full 95 percent of the points will be between ±2s, 99.7 percent between ±3s,
             and very close to 100 percent between ±4s. This is why after 1000 coin tosses, you
             are very likely to have hit 50 percent heads plus or minus a few percent.
                 Knowing just the mean and the standard deviation, one could come very close to
             reproducing the actual data from a normal distribution. Hence, in a way, random
             processes are also compressible because many instances can be described by a small
             collection of numbers. So even though any particular coin toss is unpredictable,
             the properties of collections of coin tosses are very predictable. As an analogy, it is
             impossible to keep track of the trajectories of individual molecules in a closed volume
             of air, since there are simply too many ways that gas molecules can collide with
             each other. Nevertheless, collections of gas molecules behave in very predictable
             ways. Knowing only the temperature and pressure of a gas tells you enough about
             the whole ensemble of molecules that you can eﬀectively ignore what the individual
             molecules are doing. Notice that the properties of temperature and pressure cannot
             be attributed to a single gas molecule but only to collections of molecules. Similarly,
             the mean and standard deviation of a normal random process make sense only for
             collections of random events. Yet these two numbers manage to get to the essence
             of what is important about a particular normal distribution.


9.3 Eﬀective Complexity

             We now have at our disposal two very diﬀerent definitions of what it can mean
             for something to be simple. Both seem reasonable but are somewhat in conflict
             with one another. For instance, if we think of the random bit sequences generated
             for a random walk, we know from the results in Section 9.1 that it would be very
             diﬃcult to get a computer program to duplicate such a sequence. Any program
             that succeeds would probably have to store the random sequence explicitly, because
             random strings cannot be compressed. However, if we have a coin at our disposal,
             even though we cannot reproduce a specific random sequence, we can still duplicate
             an infinite number of random strings that would have the same statistical properties
             as the candidate sequence that we wished to reproduce. Complementary to this,
             regular sequences of strings or sets (the very sorts of things that a computer would
             be able to compress) would be nearly impossible to reproduce with a coin toss.
             Thus, a coin toss is good at doing the exact sorts of things that a computer is bad
             at, and vice versa.
                 How, then, do we describe what it really means for something to be complex?
             Simply stating that “complexity is the opposite of simplicity” seems to violate at
             least one of our two definitions of simplicity. Nevertheless, a number of scientists,
             most notably James Crutchfield, Charles Bennet, Murray Gell-Mann, and David
             Wolpert and William Macready, have been working on this problem, producing
135   Postscript: Fractals




         “Complexity”




        Low Information Content                          High Information Content
        High Compressibility                                  Low Compressibility
        Orderly                                                          Random

         Figure 9.3    Complexity in terms of information, compressibility, and randomness


      several candidate measures of “eﬀective complexity.” Most of the proposed measures
      diﬀer from each other but share at least one important characteristic, in that strictly
      regular things as well as strictly irregular things are “simple,” while things that are
      neither regular nor irregular are “complex.” Figure 9.3 illustrates how information,
      compressibility, and randomness relate to any of these useful notions of complexity.
          On one extreme we have the pure regularity found in Euclidean objects. De-
      terministic fractals, while not simple, have compact algorithmic descriptions but
      elaborate structures. Fractals fail to be strictly simple because even though they
      are defined by short programs, these programs must be made to run forever in order
      to completely express the infinite self-similarity that they contain.
          On the other extreme of Figure 9.3 is pure noise. Brownian motion is slightly
      more complex than pure noise because Brownian processes must have “memory,”
      in that every random injection is always made relative to the previous state; thus,
      a random walker’s position is not just a random location but the sum of an infinite
      number of random steps. Hence, fractals, both deterministic and stochastic, while
      not simple, seem to be on the edge of being complex. They can be compactly
      described but can be realized only by “programs” that never halt. At the very peak
      of complexity, we would hope to find things such as the human brain, but this is
      just speculation on my part.
          To be sure, the jury is still out as to how the word “complexity” should be
      defined. Moreover, it is not even clear to many people that there can exist a catchall
      definition or measure that adequately captures any reasonable intuitive notion of
      what it means for something to be complex. This is especially true when we consider
136          Postscript: Fractals



             that there are literally dozens of conflicting measurements of the term “complexity”
             found in the sciences. Nevertheless, at least from a more or less philosophical point
             of view, there seems to be something exciting happening between orderly things
             and random things.
                 Is it a coincidence that of the two principal types of fractals found in nature (de-
             terministic and stochastic), both are on the edge between simplicity and complexity?
             Occam’s Razor is the principle that when faced with multiple but equivalent inter-
             pretations of some phenomenon, one should always choose the simplest explanation
             that correctly fits the data. Occam’s Razor is one of the guiding principles of scien-
             tific research precisely because nature almost always shows a preference for doing
             things as simply as possible. Could it be that fractals are an artifact of nature’s
             application of this principle?
                 Clearly, pure random noise and perfect regularity are simpler than fractals. But
             natural fractal structures come in such a rich variety that it may very well be
             that they oﬀer the greatest amount of functionality for the amount of underlying
             complexity consumed. This idea, that truly complex things occur at a transition
             point between two extremes, is a theme that will recur many more times throughout
             book.


9.4 Further Reading
              Chaitin, G. J. (1997). The limits of mathematics: A course on information theory
              & limits of formal reasoning. Singapore: Springer-Verlag.
              Cowan, G., Pines, D., & Meltzer, D. (Eds.). (1994). Complexity: Metaphors,
              models, and reality, volume XIX of Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of
              Complexity. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
              Dewdney, A. K. (1993). 200 percent of nothing: An eye-opening tour through the
              twists and turns of math abuse and innumeracy. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
              Gell-Mann, M. (1995). The quark and the jaguar: Adventures in the simple and
              the complex. New York: W. H. Freeman.
              Gonick, L. & Smith, W. (1993). The cartoon guide to statistics. New York:
              HarperCollins.
              Stinson, D. R. (1995). Cryptography: Theory and practice. Boca Raton: CRC
              Press.
              Wassermann, G. D. (1997). From Occam’s Razor to the roots of consciousness: 20
              essays on philosophy, philosophy of science and philosophy of mind. Avebury.
III   Chaos


      Simple motion is rare in nature. It is more common to find highly complicated non-
      linear motion due to chaos. Chaotic systems can easily be mistaken for randomness
      despite the fact that they are always deterministic. Part of the confusion is due to
      the fact that the future of chaotic systems can be predicted only on very short-term
      time scales. Chaotic systems possess a form of functional self-similarity that shows
      itself in fractal strange attractors. This fractal functionality, combined with chaotic
      unpredictability, is reminiscent of the uncertainty found in computing systems.
           Chapter 10 introduces the key components of chaotic systems and highlights the
      properties common to all such systems. Chapter 11 contains a sampling of fractal
      strange attractors that are generated from chaotic systems. Chapter 12 considers
      a type of chaos found in producer-consumer systems, and compares and contrasts
      two very diﬀerent types of modeling methods. Chapter 13 shows how some of the
      properties of chaotic systems can be exploited for the purpose of controlling them.
      Finally, Chapter 14 compares and contrasts chaos to randomness and incomputabil-
      ity.
10   Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps




                                            Chaos is the score upon which reality is written.
                                                                           — Henry Miller


                            . . . it may happen that small diﬀerences in the initial conditions
                                              produce very great ones in the final phenomena.
                                                                            — Henri Poincaré


                                              Prediction is diﬃcult, especially of the future.
                                             — Mark Twain (also attributed to Niels Bohr)




     In the previous book part we saw how natural physical structures could be
     described in terms of fractal geometry. In this book part we will be concerned with
     the related topic of chaos in nonlinear dynamical systems. A dynamical system
     can be loosely defined as anything that has motion, such as swinging pendulums,
     bouncing balls, robot arms, reactions in a chemical process, water flowing in a
     stream, or an airplane in flight. For each of these examples there are two important
     aspects that must be considered. First, we need to determine what it is about
     a dynamical system that changes over time. In the case of the pendulum, both
     position and velocity vary over time, so we would be concerned with the “motion”
     of both of these states of the pendulum. A less obvious example is found in a
     chemical reaction, where the “motion” can be found in the ratio of reactants to
     reagents, or perhaps in some physical aspect of the chemicals, such as temperature
     or viscosity. The second aspect of a dynamical system that we must be concerned
     with is in the collection of rules that determine how a dynamical system changes
     over time. Usually, scientists have a mathematical model of how a real dynamical
     system works. The model will typically have equations that may be parameterized
     by time and the previous states of the system. Sometimes these equations can be
     used to get an estimate of what the future state of a dynamical system will be. In
140   Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps




                    (a)                           (b)                            (c)


      Figure 10.1     Diﬀerent types of motion: (a) fixed point, (b) limit cycle (c) quasiperiodic


      this spirit, let’s agree that the “motion” of a dynamical system is dependent on how
      the state of the system changes over time. Moreover, there must exist a set of rules
      that governs how a dynamical system in some state evolves to another state. We
      may not know what the rules are, but if a dynamical system is deterministic, a set
      of rules for the time evolution of the system exists independently of our knowledge
      of it.
          There are many diﬀerent types of motion that can be exhibited by a dynamical
      system. The simplest is fixed point behavior, which can be seen in a pendulum when
      friction and gravity bring the system to a halt. Most fixed points can be likened to
      a ball placed on top of a hill, which rolls downward until at some point the ball sits
      on a flat spot and has no momentum to carry it further.
          The next simplest type of motion is known as a limit cycle or periodic motion,
      which involves movement that repeats itself over and over. A lone planet orbiting
      a star in an elliptical orbit is an example of a limit cycle. Some limit cycles are
      more complicated than others. For example, a child on a swing drives the motion of
      the swing by periodically rocking in beat with the natural frequency of the swing,
      much like an idealized pendulum. Now, if the child rhythmically swings one leg at
      a higher frequency, the motion of that leg will cause the motion of his or her body
      to subtly wobble back and forth. If it is timed accurately, the child may be able to
      coerce the motion into behavior that is more complicated than that of the planet,
      with his or her body moving back and forth along the main axis of the swing, and
      perpendicularly left to right in step with the leg.
          A slightly more complicated form of motion is found in quasiperiodic systems,
      which are similar to periodic systems except that they never quite repeat themselves.
      For example, the moon orbits Earth, which orbits the sun, which, in turn, orbits
      the galactic center, and so on. In order for the combined motion of the moon and
      Earth to be truly periodic, they must at some future point return to some previously
      occupied state. But in order for that to happen, all of the individual motions must
      resonate, which means that there must exist a length of time that will evenly divide
141         Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps



            all of the frequencies. Figure 10.1c shows quasiperiodic motion as consisting of two
            independent circular motions that fail to repeat due to a lack of resonance.
                Up until the last thirty years or so, almost every scientist believed that everything
            in the universe fell into either fixed point, periodic, or quasiperiodic behavior. The
            belief in a clockwork universe, as exemplified by the mathematician Pierre-Simon
            de Laplace1 , held that, in principle, if one had an accurate measure of the state of
            the universe and knew all of the laws that govern the motion of everything, then one
            would be able to predict the future with near perfect accuracy. We now know that
            this is not true, since science was mistaken in its assumption that everything is either
            a fixed point or a limit cycle. Chaotic systems are not just exceptions to the norm
            but are, in fact, more prevalent than anyone could imagine. Chaos is everywhere: in
            the turbulence of water and air, in the wobble of planets as they follow complicated
            orbits, in global weather patterns, in the human brain’s electrochemical activity,
            and even in the motion of a child on a swing. In all of these cases the complicated
            motion produced by chaos prohibits predicting the future in the long term. On the
            other hand, phenomena that were once thought to be purely random are now known
            to be chaotic. The good news in this case is that chaotic systems admit prediction
            in the short term.
                Chaos is related to the other topics of this book in many ways. The pathological
            nature of the incomputable functions from Part I is very similar to the unpredictabil-
            ity of chaotic systems. The motion of chaotic systems can be described by fractal
            geometry. There is also a hypothesis known as “computation on the edge of chaos”
            that will be relevant in the next book part when we study complex systems.
                In this chapter we will be primarily concerned with getting an intuitive feel for
            how chaos works in a simple, discrete time, iterative system. The nice thing about
            the examples that we will be looking at is that the richness, diversity, and beauty
            of chaos are exhibited by a deceptively simple dynamical system.


10.1 The Logistic Map
            The logistic map (also known as the “quadratic map” or the “Feigenbaum map”)
            is a simple population growth model that is defined by the iterative equation2

                                                  xt+1 = 4rxt (1 − xt ),

            where r is a parameter that can be set to reflect the reproduction rate of the
            population. The legal values of xt (as well as xt+1 ) range between 0 and 1 inclusively.
                 1 Laplace claimed that “given for one instant an intelligence which could comprehend all the

            forces by which nature is animated and the respective positions of the beings which compose it
            . . . nothing would be uncertain, and the future as the past would be present to its eyes.”
                 2 In many scientific writings the logistic map is given as x
                                                                              t+1 = rxt (1 − xt ), with r ranging
            from 0 to 4. I have deliberately added the 4 in my presentation so that r can range from 0 to 1.
142   Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps



      If xt equals 0, then we can interpret the population as being extinct. If xt equals 1,
      then the system is overpopulated (with imminent extinction at the next time step).
      All other values between 0 and 1 represent intermediate population levels.
          The value of r is also allowed to vary between 0 and 1. If r is 0, then nothing
      reproduces in the population. If r is equal to 1, then the members of the population
      are reproducing at the maximum rate. Over the course of this section, we will look
      at several diﬀerent values of r. Since the logistic map is so simple, you may wish
      to use a calculator while reading this chapter, so as to simulate population growth
      yourself.
          To use the logistic map, we must choose a constant value for r and an initial
      population, x0 . From x0 we can compute x1 , then x2 , and so on. Intuitively, we can
      assign a useful interpretation to the individual terms of the dynamical system. We
      can think of 4rxt as being positive feedback in the sense that as xt grows in size,
      so does the value of 4rxt , which is akin to saying that a population size is partially
      determined by the product of the previous size and the rate at which members
      reproduce. The (1 − xt ) portion of the equation can be thought of as negative
      feedback, since increasing xt will decrease (1 − xt ); thus, (1 − xt ) can be thought of
      as population decline due to overpopulation and scarce resources.
          What we would like to know is, for some value of r, what happens to the long-
      term behavior of the system as t goes to infinity. Let’s consider some special cases.
      Suppose that r is less than or equal to 41 . In this case the time evolution is described
      by αxt (1 − xt ), with α, xt , and (1 − xt ) all between 0 and 1. Since the population at
      the next time step is the product of three numbers between 0 and 1, the population
      at the next time step must always be smaller than what it is at the current time step.
      Thus, no matter what initial value we choose for xt , if r ≤ 41 , then the population
      is doomed to extinction.
          Suppose that r is greater than 14 but less than 34 . In this case the long-term
      behavior of the logistic map is to fall into a fixed point. Figure 10.2 illustrates
      this graphically. The graph on the left shows the values of xt plotted over time for
      100 steps. The graph on the right shows the state space of the dynamical system
      (also referred to as the phase space) that plots xt versus xt+1 to illustrate how the
      next iterate depends on the current value. The parabola in the graph is a plot of
                                        7
      xt+1 = 4rxt (1 − xt ) with r = 10   . At any time step, we can geometrically determine
      the value of the next iterate by taking the current value of xt , drawing a line at that
      value from the identity line to where it intersects the parabola, and then making a
      90 degree turn toward the identity line again. In this way, the time evolution of the
      logistic map can be seen to be attracted to the fixed point. Moreover, it doesn’t
      matter what initial value we pick for x0 , since any choice between 0 and 1 will cause
      the system to converge into the same fixed point.
                                      7
          If we set r greater than 10   but less than 34 , then the value of the attracting fixed
      point will increase as we make r larger. Intuitively, this makes sense since one would
      expect a stable population to increase in size if the reproduction rate increases. All
143                     Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps


          1                                                                  1.0



         0.8




         0.6

  x(t)

         0.4




         0.2




          0                                                                  0.0
               0   10   20   30   40       50      60   70   80   90   100         0.0                          1.0
                                        t = time

                                       (a)                                                 (b)

                                                               7
                        Figure 10.2 Logistic map with r = 10     : (a) The time series quickly stabilizes to a fixed
                        point. (b) The state space of the same system shows how subsequent steps of the system
                        get pulled into the fixed point.



                        fixed points, regardless of the value of r, can be found by seeing where the state
                        space plot of xt versus xt+1 intersects the identity line. With 14 < r ≤ 34 the parabola
                        will always intersect the identity line at two points: the stable fixed point , which
                        attracts all nonzero points, and 0 which is an unstable fixed point . The first fixed
                        point is stable because if you randomly perturb the system away from the fixed
                        point, the system will quickly converge back to the attracting fixed point again.
                        Zero is an unstable fixed point because any perturbation will cause the system to
                        leave that infinitesimal region forever. If you like, you can think of a stable fixed
                        point as being similar to a ball at the bottom of a crater, valley, or depression. If
                        you softly kick the ball, it will move just a bit, then stop. If your depression is
                        shaped like a perfect bowl, then the ball will come to rest at the same location
                        it started from. An unstable fixed point is like a ball perfectly balanced on the
                        peak of a mountain. The slightest nudge will cause the ball to move away from
                        the fixed point, never to return. We can squeeze one more useful notion out of
                        this metaphor. Considering the stable fixed point once again, notice that there is
                        an area defined by the perimeter of the depression. If you drop the ball anywhere
                        within the perimeter, the ball will fall to the bottom of the depression. If the ball
                        is dropped outside of the perimeter, the ball will go elsewhere. This area within
                        the perimeter is sometimes referred to as the basin of attraction. An unstable fixed
                        point has a basin of attraction that has 0 volume and area.
144           Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps




                                          Figure 10.3     A single bifurcation


                  Something interesting happens when r is set just above 43 . For example, when
                             8                                                     22
              r is equal to 10 , as long as the choice for x0 is neither 0 nor 32     , the system will
              never converge to any fixed point. Instead, the population will settle into a period-
              2 limit cycle, which means that it will oscillate between two values. Zero will still
              be an unstable fixed point, but the fixed point near 22  32 will now also be unstable.
              Figure 10.3 illustrates what’s happening much better.
                  The leftmost portion of the drawing illustrates how the location of the fixed
              point gradually increases as we increase the value of r; however, at a critical value,
              the path will split in two. The two solid lines on the right illustrate how the location
              of the period-2 limit cycle changes as the value of r is increased. The dashed line
              shows how the once stable fixed point continues to exist, but in a form that is
              unstable. Thus, solid lines denote stable paths, and dashed lines denote unstable
              paths. Figure 10.4 illustrates the period-2 limit cycle in a form that is similar to
              Figure 10.2. Notice that the state space diagram now clearly shows how the state
              of the system oscillates between two values.


10.2 Stability and Instability
              For one-dimensional maps like the logistic map, there is a very simple method to
              determine if a fixed point or limit cycle is stable or unstable. The idea behind the
              technique is to examine the local behavior of the map in the vicinity of a fixed point
              or limit cycle. For notational purposes, let’s refer to the mapping function as f (x),
              that is, f (x) = 4rx(1 − x) for the logistic map. The first derivative of f (x), which
              is equal to f ′ (x) = 4r(1 − 2x), tells us how steeply sloped the function is in the
              vicinity of x. Now, suppose there exists a fixed point, which we will call xF , and
              that we would like to know whether the fixed point is stable or unstable. If we
              look at the derivative of f (x) evaluated at xF , then the following possibilities may
              characterize the behavior of f (x) at xF :
                                    |f ′ (xF )|   <   1   attracting and stable
                                     f ′ (xF )    =   0   super-stable
                                    |f ′ (xF )|   >   1   repelling and unstable
                                    |f ′ (xF )|   =   1   neutral
145           Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps



                            1




                           0.8




                           0.6

                   x(t)

                           0.4




                           0.2




                            0
                                 0   10   20   30   40       50            60   70   80   90     100
                                                          t = time

                                                         (a)

  1.0                                                          1.0




  0.0                                                          0.0
        0.0                                         1.0              0.0                               1.0

                          (b)                                                                  (c)

                                                     8
              Figure 10.4 Logistic map with r = 10     : (a) The time series quickly stabilizes to a period-
              2 limit cycle. (b) The state space of the same system shows how subsequent steps of the
              system get pulled into the limit cycle. (c) The state space of the same system but with
              only the converged values for xt plotted, so as to clearly show the limit cycle’s location.
146           Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps




                            1




                           0.8




                           0.6

                   x(t)

                           0.4




                           0.2




                            0
                                 0   10   20   30   40       50            60   70   80   90     100
                                                          t = time

                                                         (a)

  1.0                                                          1.0




  0.0                                                          0.0
        0.0                                         1.0              0.0                               1.0

                          (b)                                                                  (c)

                                                       88
              Figure 10.5 Logistic map with r = 100       : (a) The time series quickly stabilizes to a
              period-4 limit cycle. (b) The state space of the same system. (c) The state space of the
              same system but with only the converged values for xt plotted.
147           Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps



                            1




                           0.8




                           0.6

                   x(t)

                           0.4




                           0.2




                            0
                                 0   10   20   30   40       50            60   70   80   90     100
                                                          t = time

                                                         (a)

  1.0                                                          1.0




  0.0                                                          0.0
        0.0                                         1.0              0.0                               1.0

                          (b)                                                                  (c)


              Figure 10.6 Logistic map with r = 1: (a) The time series is chaotic and has the appear-
              ance of noise. (b) The state space of the same system, which illustrates how the system’s
              trajectory visits every local region. (c) The state space of the same system with only four
              steps plotted, so as to show how small diﬀerences turn into larger diﬀerences.
148           Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps



                    As a specific case, consider r = 43 and xF = 23 , which would give us |f ′ (xF )| =
              |3(1 − 43 )| = 1, which further means that the system is neutral at that xF for the
              given value of r. Let’s see what happens when we change r by just a very small
              amount. First, let’s make r a little bit smaller: r = 43 − ϵ, where ϵ represents a
              very small positive number. The new location of the fixed point can be found by
              solving for xF in the equation xF = 4rxF (1 − xF ). If we take this new value and
              plug it into |f ′ (xF )|, we find that the result will be just less than 1, which means
              that the fixed point is now stable. Similarly, if we set r to 43 + ϵ, the new fixed point
              can be computed and plugged into |f ′ (xF )|. The resulting value (if a suitably small
              enough ϵ is used) will be just larger than 1, which further implies that the fixed
              point is now unstable.
                    The analysis for the stability of a limit cycle is nearly identical except for the
              fact that a limit cycle will oscillate between, say, m points in an orbit: xF1 , xF2 ,
              · · ·, xFm . Taking the absolute value of the product of f ′ (x) evaluated at each of
              these points gives us
                                 .            .
                                 ."m          .
                                 . f (xFi ). = |f ′ (xF1 ) × f ′ (xF2 ) × · · · × f ′ (xFm )| ,
                                        ′
                                 .            .
                                 .            .
                               i=1

              which has the same stability properties listed above for fixed points.


10.3 Bifurcations and Universality
              Recall that the junction point where the system moves from a fixed point to a period-
              2 limit cycle occurs at exactly 34 . This period doubling is known as a bifurcation.
              Let’s√see what happens as we increase r further. When r is set to just larger than
              (1 + 6) ÷ 4, the logistic map will bifurcate a second time, giving a period-4 limit
              cycle. Figure 10.5 shows the period-4 cycle in time-series and state-space forms.
                  If we increase r even more, we will eventually force the system into a period-8
              limit cycle, then a period-16 cycle, and so on. The amount that we have to increase
              r to get another period doubling gets smaller and smaller for each new bifurcation.
              This cascade of period doublings is reminiscent of the race between Achilles and
              the tortoise, in that an infinite number of bifurcations (or time steps in the race)
              can be confined to a local region of finite size. At a very special critical value,
              the dynamical system will fall into what is essentially an infinite-period limit cycle.
              This is chaos. Figure 10.6 shows the time series and state space of the logistic map
              for r = 1, which is in the chaotic regime.
                  Figure 10.7 illustrates the transition from order to chaos with two bifurcation
              diagrams. The x-axis represents a value for r, and the y-axis shows the period of
              the limit cycle. Notice that the diagram clearly shows how each period doubling
              spans a shorter amount of space than the previous doubling. Eventually the period
              doublings converge to what looks like an infinite-period attractor. Notice also that
149             Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps


      1.0                                               0.9




      0.0                                               0.8
         0.65                                1.0           0.85                                     0.90

                       (a)                                                   (b)


                Figure 10.7 Bifurcation diagrams for the logistic map: (a) This image has values of r
                such that fixed points, limit cycles, and chaos are all visible. (b) This image shows the
                detail of the boxed section of (a).


                the two images are very self-similar in that we could enlarge a portion of Figure 10.7b
                to get another self-similar section, and so on.
                    Bifurcations of this sort are seen in many diﬀerent types of phenomena. What
                is truly astonishing is that for a very broad class of bump-like functions, such as
                the logistic map, the cascade of bifurcations behaves in accordance with a universal
                number known as the Feigenbaum constant . For notational convenience let’s refer
                to the value of r at which the logistic map bifurcates into a period-2n limit cycle
                as an , that is, a1 = 34 . Thus, we would know that for ak−1 < r ≤ ak the logistic
                map would have a stable period-2k limit cycle. Mitchell Feigenbaum considered the
                properties of the series of numbers generated by
                                                          ak − ak−1
                                                   dk =             ,
                                                          ak+1 − ak
                for k ≥ 2. In the equation above, the numerator and denominator represent the
                distance between successive bifurcation points, as is shown in Figure 10.8. There-
                fore, the whole expression, being the ratio of the two distances, quantifies how
                fast the next bifurcation occurs relative to the previous one. Feigenbaum showed
                that d∞ = 4.669202 · · ·, not just for the logistic map but for all one-dimensional
                maps that have a single hump. Thus, every chaotic system that falls into this class
                bifurcates at the same rate.
150           Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps


                                                                                           ak − ak−1                                                                                                                  ak+1 − ak
                                      .............                                                                                                                                         .. ..
                                                                                                                                                                                            .......................
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .............
                                        .
                                        ...                                                                                                                                                             ...                                                              ...
                                          .                                                                                                                                                               .                                                                .
                                          ...                                                                                                                                                             ...                                                              ..........
                                            .                                                                                                                                                               .                                      .........................
                                            ...                                                                                                                                                             ... ............                                                ...
                                              .                                                                                                                                                               .....                                                           .
                                              ...                                                                                                                                                             .                                                               ...
                                                .                                                                                          ....
                                                                                                                                              . ..
                                                                                                                                                 ... ...
                                                                                                                                                       ...............................................                                                                          .
                                                ...                                                                   ........
                                                                                                                             .............                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ...                                   ...
                                                  .                                                            .......                                                                                        .. ......                                                           .
                                                  ...                                                  ....
                                                                                                       .   ..
                                                                                                            ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ...                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 . ...........................
                                                                                                    ...                                                                                                                                                                           .........
                                                    .
                                                                                             ...
                                                                                               . ...                                                                                                             .
                                                    ...                                     ..                                                                                                                   ...                                                               ...
                                                      . .......                                                                                                                                                    .                                                                 .
                                                      ... ...                                                                                                                                                      ...                                                               ...
                                                        ....                                                                                                                                                         .                                                                 .
                                                        .....                                                                                                                                                        ...                                                               ...
                                                          ...                                                                                                                                                          .                                                                 .
                                                           ...                                                                                                                                                         ...                                                               ...
                                                             ....                                                                                                                                                        .                                                                 .
                                                             ......                                                                                                                                                      ...                                                               ...
                                                               . ...                                                                                                                                                       .                                                                 .
                                                               ... ....                   .                                                                                                                                ...                                                               ...
                                                                 . ......                                                                                                                                                    .                                                                 .
                                                                 ...                          .....                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ...                                                               ..........
                                                                   .                               .....                                                                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                   ...
                                                                                                       ......
                                                                                                            ........                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              . ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 . ............. ...........
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ...
                                                                     .                                              ..........
                                                                                                                             .                                                                                                 .. .......                                                        ..
                                                                                                                              ....................                                                                                       .
                                                                     ...                                                                          ........................................ ......                                                                                                 ...
                                                                       .                                                                                                                  ...........                                                                                               .
                                                                       ...                                                                                                                                                      .......                                                             ...
                                                                         .                                                                                                                                                        . ........                                                          .
                                                                         ...                                                                                                                                                      ...          ........... .........
                                                                           .                                                                                                                                                        .                     .............
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ..
                                                                           ...                                                                                                                                                      ...                                                               ... ....
                                                                             .                                                                                                                                                        .                                                                 .
                                                                             ...                                                                                                                                                      .                                                                 .
                                                                               ...........                                                                                                  .......................                                          .............
                                                                                         .                                                                                                  .                                              .                 .

                                    ak−1                                                                                                                                                                                        ak ak+1

              Figure 10.8    Detail of a bifurcation diagram to show the source of the Feigenbaum
              constant


                  By itself, this is an amazing result, yet it turns out that there is a very practical
              application for this knowledge. Suppose you are interested in a chaotic process that
              has a single tunable parameter like r for the logistic map. By empirically noting
              where the first few bifurcations occur, it is possible to get an accurate estimate for
              a∞ , which is the point where the system becomes chaotic. Thus, it is possible to
              estimate when a system will become chaotic before it ever happens.


10.4 Prediction, Layered Pastry, and Information Loss
              One of the most important diﬀerences between chaotic processes and truly stochastic
              processes is that the future behavior of a chaotic system can be predicted in the short
              term, while stochastic processes can be characterized only statistically. For example,
              in a fair coin toss, knowing the results from earlier coin tosses does absolutely
              nothing for you if you are trying to predict what the next coin toss will yield.
              The best you could do, in terms of being able to predict the future, would be to
              generalize over an entire history, for instance, we could safely say that about half of
              our future coin tosses will result in heads; however, we are powerless to make any
              accurate assertions about any particular random event, such as the very next coin
              toss. Chaotic processes, on the other hand, can be predicted, since chaos always has
              hidden order within it. For many chaotic processes, the order becomes apparent
              when one looks at state space plots, as was done earlier. In contrast to chaos,
              plotting xt against xt+1 for a stochastic process will reveal no hidden structure
              whatsoever.
151                 Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps


      1                         1                                 1                            1




      0                         0                                 0                            0
          0               1         0                       1         0                  1         0                   1




              (a)                             (b)                           (c)                          (d)


                    Figure 10.9         Functional mappings with r = 1: (a) f 1 (x), (b) f 2 (x), (c) f 3 (x), (d) f 4 (x)


                        The flipside of this is that long-term prediction of a chaotic process becomes
                    more diﬃcult the farther into the future we try to predict. To predict one time
                    step into the future, we would need to have an idea of what f (x) looked like. If
                    we wanted to predict two time steps into the future, we would have to examine
                    f (x) recursively applied to itself as f (f (x)). For the general case, let’s agree that
                    f m (x) denotes the mapping function of f (x) recursively applied to itself a total of
                    m times. Figure 10.9 illustrates how the mapping functions become more and more
                    complicated as we increase the number of time steps into the future that we are
                    looking at.
                        The pathological nature of chaos can be better appreciated with an analogy.
                    Suppose you are a pastry chef who wants to make a pastry crust that has many
                    layers in it. One way to accomplish this would be to stretch out your dough, fold
                    one half over the other, and then repeat as often as needed. Notice that each step
                    doubles the number of layers. It turns out that the motion of a chaotic system is
                    very similar to the way we would form the pastry crust. For the logistic map, the
                    4rx portion of the function “stretches” out the input surface, while the −4rx2 term
                    “cuts” and “folds” the input. In this way, two grains of sugar that were originally
                    close to one another in the pastry dough would gradually move away from one
                    another, becoming decorrelated from one another as time went on. The sensitivity
                    of chaotic systems is a result of these mixing actions.
                        Looking again at Figure 10.9, we can see that f m (x) has 2m−1 “humps” in it,
                    which is similar to the way our pastry has an exponential number of layers. We will
                    now see how all of this relates to a firm theoretical limitation on how far into the
                    future one can predict. To make the analysis a bit simpler, let’s assume that you
                    only need to distinguish xt values that are greater than or equal to 21 from those
                    that are less than 12 . In other words, if you are predicting m time steps into the
                    future and I supply you with a value for xt , your prediction scheme should return
                    1 bit of information: either “Yes, xt+m ≤ 21 ” or “No, xt+m > 12 .”
                        To represent the starting value of xt , we must ultimately encode the information
                    in binary form. First, consider the case of m = 1. To determine if xt+1 is greater
                    than (or less than) 21 , we essentially need to partition the input space into at least
152                Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps



       t   xat           xbt           |xat − xbt |      t    xat           xbt            |xat − xbt |
       0   0.987654321   0.987654320   0.000000001      14    0.755999804   0.755936076    0.000063729
       1   0.048773053   0.048773057   0.000000004      15    0.737856401   0.737986901    0.000130500
       2   0.185576969   0.185576983   0.000000014      16    0.773697331   0.773448940    0.000248390
       3   0.604552629   0.604552665   0.000000035      17    0.700359085   0.700902708    0.000543623
       4   0.956274991   0.956274961   0.000000030      18    0.839424949   0.838552408    0.000872541
       5   0.167252531   0.167252639   0.000000108      19    0.539162817   0.541529069    0.002366252
       6   0.557116488   0.557116776   0.000000288      20    0.993865095   0.993101346    0.000763749
       7   0.986950827   0.986950696   0.000000132      21    0.024389072   0.027404252    0.003015180
       8   0.051515568   0.051516080   0.000000512      22    0.095176980   0.106613035    0.011436055
       9   0.195446856   0.195448694   0.000001839      23    0.344473289   0.380986782    0.036513494
      10   0.628989529   0.628994009   0.000004480      24    0.903245768   0.943343416    0.040097648
      11   0.933446806   0.933442183   0.000004623      25    0.349571401   0.213786462    0.135784940
      12   0.248495467   0.248511497   0.000016030      26    0.909484947   0.672327242    0.237157705
      13   0.746981880   0.747014131   0.000032252      27    0.329288313   0.881213286    0.551924973


                   Table 10.1 Exponentially divergence: With two slightly diﬀerent starting positions, two
                   chaotic trajectories will exponentially diverge from one another.


                   three sections: the middle section, where the hump is greater than 21 , and the left
                   and right extremes, where the function descends below 12 . For arbitrary values of
                   m, we need to partition the input space into 2m + 1 sections. Consequently, we need
                   at least m + 1 bits of accuracy to encode the initial value for xt . If our floating-
                   point representation for numbers uses any number of bits less than m + 1, then the
                   accuracy of the predictions can be no better than a random guess. The situation
                   is such that in a very real way, we lose 1 bit of information for each time step into
                   the future that we try to predict.
                       To put all of this in perspective, the most advanced computers today use 128 bits
                   for floating-point numbers. So even though the logistic map is an extremely simple
                   system, modern computers can make only marginally accurate predictions for less
                   than 128 time steps into the future. You may be thinking that a clever programmer
                   could work around this by using more bits for the floating-point numbers. However,
                   since a computer’s memory is finite in size, there will always be a value m for which
                   all computers are helpless to predict what xt+m looks like.
                       The problem gets even worse when we consider two other factors. First, for all of
                   this section we have been assuming that our initial measurement of xt was accurate.
                   In the real world there is always some sort of measurement error. Any error, even
                   something unbelievably infinitesimal, will grow at an exponential rate, breaking
                   any prediction scheme we can think of. The second factor relates to some of the
                   discussion from Chapter 2. More specifically, what happens when the state falls on
                   an irrational number? Since there are infinitely many more irrational than rational
153        Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps



           numbers, any encoding scheme that attempts to represent all numbers by rational
           numbers must have—by definition—at least some error in the storage technique.
               We will now demonstrate all of this with an experiment that you can perform on
           a simple calculator. We are going to compute two chaotic trajectories of the logistic
           map for r = 1. One trajectory, which we will label xat , will have an initial value of
           xa0 = 0.987654321. The second trajectory will be labeled xbt , and use an initial value
           of xb0 = 0.987654320. Therefore, the two starting positions diﬀer only by about 1
           part in a billion, which would be regarded as an amazingly accurate measurement
           in the real world.
               To represent a decimal number requires about three bits of information per
           decimal place. Since our numbers have nine digits, there is a total of approximately
           twenty-seven bits of information per number. Therefore, let’s see what happens to
           the two trajectories after twenty-seven time steps. For the first few steps the error
           seems quite tolerable. In fact, the two trajectories are very similar for about the
           first twenty steps. It is not until the very last step that xat and xbt fall on diﬀerent
           sides of the 21 divider; however, from this point on, the two trajectories will have
           no correlation with each other at all, since, as can be seen in Table 10.1, the error
           roughly doubles in size for each additional time step.


10.5 The Shadowing Lemma
           There are a few troubling facts about the results from the last section. As touched on
           briefly before, since computers can represent only digital quantities and approximate
           real numbers with finite precision, any computer simulation of a chaotic system is
           doomed to degrade increasingly the farther into the future one tries to predict.
           Another facet of this problem involves the fact that if we simulate a chaotic system
           in a computer, at some point in the future the simulated system must start to repeat
           itself because of the finite precision available. In other words, computers cannot
           really generate aperiodic trajectories, but only limit cycles with, admittedly, very
           long periods.
               How, then, do we know if computer simulations of chaos are valid in the sense
           that they yield true characterizations of real chaos? Worse still, is it possible that
           “chaos” is nothing more than a computer artifact that results from trying to repre-
           sent a stochastic world with digital numbers? The shadowing lemma is a remarkable
           result that has an answer to these questions, at least for certain types of chaotic
           systems.
               Figure 10.10 contains two graphs that illustrate the shadowing lemma in action.
           The graph on the left shows an exact trajectory (from a chaotic system) plotted
           alongside a simulated one. For the reasons outlined earlier, the two trajectories
           inevitably drift apart.
               The graph on the right of Figure 10.10 shows the same computed trajectory as
           in the first graph, but this time a shadow trajectory is plotted alongside it. For
154          Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps




                              Computed Trajectory                          Computed Trajectory
                              Exact Trajectory                             Exact Shadow Trajectory



             Figure 10.10 Shadow trajectories: On the left, the computed trajectory deviates from
             the exact (real) trajectory because of accumulated errors. On the right is a shadow of the
             computed trajectory that is arbitrarily close to the computed trajectory.


             any computed trajectory, the shadowing lemma posits the existence of a shadow
             trajectory that follows arbitrarily close to the computed trajectory. In other words,
             the shadowing lemma tells us that a computer simulation of chaos does, in fact,
             provide an accurate picture of the motion in a chaotic system.
                As an example of what the shadowing lemma means, consider the problem of
             weather forecasting. We know that all weather forecasts are doomed to be inac-
             curate in the long term. However, if we look at a weather simulation as it evolves
             over time, it is quite possible that the simulation captures all of the richness and
             complexity of the real weather system as it could happen.


10.6 Characteristics of Chaos
             In this section we will summarize the characteristics of chaos that are common to
             all chaotic systems. Most of the issues that we will discuss in this section simply
             summarize material from the earlier portions of the chapter. The other topics that
             we will discuss will serve as motivation for the latter chapters in this part.
                 The goal of this section is to provide a working definition of chaos. This task
             is somewhat diﬃcult in that many scientists do not agree on a single definition
             of chaos. Nevertheless, the characteristics listed in this section should go a long
             way toward showing you what chaos looks like. Also, keep in mind that these
             characteristics are necessary but not suﬃcient, that is, all chaotic systems will have
             all of these characteristics, but just because a dynamical system possesses one of
             these attributes does not make it chaotic.
155   Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps



      Deterministic Chaotic systems are completely deterministic and not random.
      Given a previous history of a chaotic system, the future of the system will be
      completely determined; however, this does not mean that we can compute what the
      future looks like.
          Related to this distinction between chaotic and random processes are the topo-
      logical properties of their respective state spaces. The motion of a random process
      is, by definition, uncorrelated with the previous states of the system. As such, if
      you looked at the state space of a random process, you would see only a “blob-like”
      structure with no order whatsoever. Complementary to this, for all chaotic systems
      there is always a way of showing structure in the system’s state space. We may
      need to look at a higher-dimensional state space in order to see this structure, but
      the structure is there, nevertheless.

      Sensitive Chaotic systems are extremely sensitive to initial conditions, since any
      perturbation, no matter how minute, will forever alter the future of a chaotic system.
      This fact has sometimes been referred to as the “butterfly eﬀect,” which comes from
      Edward Lorenz’s story of how a butterfly flapping its wings can alter global weather
      patterns. In his book Chance and Chaos, David Ruelle gives an even better example
      of sensitivity to initial conditions, which I will paraphrase here. Suppose that by
      some miracle the attractive eﬀect of a single electron located at the limit of the
      known universe could be suspended momentarily. How long do you think it would
      take for this slight perturbation to change the future on a macroscopic scale? Since
      the motion of air causes individual molecules to collide with one another, it would
      be interesting to know how long it would take for these collisions to be altered.
      Amazingly, after only about fifty collisions the molecules in Earth’s atmosphere
      will have collided in a diﬀerent manner than they would have originally. If we wait
      another minute or two, the motion in a turbulent portion of the atmosphere will
      be altered at the macroscopic level. And, if we wait another week or month, the
      motion of the entire weather system will be measurably altered.
          Thus, the next time you hear your local weather forecaster tell you what next
      week’s weather will look like, you can recognize it for the nonsense it is. But this
      is not to say that all prediction is hopeless, since chaotic systems can be predicted
      over the short-term with a fair amount of accuracy. Another facet of the sensitivity
      of chaotic systems is that in many ways chaotic systems are more susceptible to
      control. You can look at it this way: Since any perturbation causes an exponential
      divergence in the state space trajectory of a chaotic system, with a minute alteration
      to the system we could profoundly alter the system’s future behavior.

      Ergodic Chaotic motion is ergodic, which means that the state space trajectory
      of a chaotic system will always return to the local region of a previous point in the
      trajectory. For example, we can define a local region of interest by a single point in
      a state space and a distance measure. Every point in the state space that is within
156          Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps



             the specified distance from the point will be considered to be in the local region
             of the point. If a system is ergodic, then no matter how small we make the local
             region, as long as it’s nonzero, we are guaranteed that the system will eventually
             return to this local region. Using the weather as an example, ergodicity means that
             it is very likely that someday in the future you will experience weather almost—but
             not exactly—identical to today’s weather.

             Embedded Chaotic attractors are embedded with an infinite number of unstable
             periodic orbits. Looking back at Figure 10.9, recall that the function f m (x) got
             more and more complicated as we increased m. For any of the plots in Figure 10.9,
             it is easy to see that the identity line, y = x, will intersect f m (x) at multiple
             locations. For all points, xp , where f m (x) intersects the identity line, xp will be
             part of a period-2m−1 unstable limit cycle. Since we can do this for any positive
             value of m, it follows that there must be an infinite number of limit cycles embedded
             within the chaotic attractor.

                Over the next four chapters we will examine these and other properties of chaotic
             systems. Chapter 11 will introduce us to chaos in multidimensional systems, strange
             attractors, as well as some important tools of the trade for visualizing chaos. In
             Chapter 12 we will examine a form of chaos that is commonly found in chemistry,
             biology, ecology, and economics. In Chapter 13 we will take a closer look at how
             chaos can be exploited to control the future. Finally, in Chapter 14, we will see how
             incomputability, randomness, and chaos can be seen as multiple facets of a single
             phenomenon.


10.7 Further Exploration
             There are four programs that I used to generate all of the computed figures in this
             chapter. In this section, I will briefly describe how to use these programs. The
             command-line options for all of the programs are summarized in Table 10.2. As
             with just about every other program listed in this book, most of the programs for
             this chapter use the -term option to specify how images are plotted.
                Another option that is common to all of the programs for this chapter is the
             -func option, which can be used to specify what one-dimensional map to use. The
             logistic map is the default map to use. Other possibilities include the tent map, the
             sine map, and the Gaussian map.
                The first program that you should try is gen1d, which will generate a one-
             dimensional time series. You may wish to use the -x0 option to specify the initial
             point, and the -r option to specify the value of r to use.
                The next program is phase1d, which can be used to generate state space plots.
             As with gen1d, the -points option can be used to specify the number of points
157   Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps



           Option Name         Option Type       Option Meaning

           Options Common to All Featured Programs
           -points        integer          number of points to plot
           -skip          integer          number of points to skip
           -aux           integer          value for auxiliary map parameter
           -x0            integer          initial value, x0
           -func          string           which map function to use

           Options Only for gen1d, phase1d, and phase1d2
           -r               integer          value for r

           Options Only for phase1d, phase1d2, and bifur1d
           -width           integer         width of the plot in pixels
           -height          integer         height of the plot in pixels
           -inv             switch          invert colors?
           -xmag            integer         magnification factor for X Windows
           -term            string          how to plot points

           Options Only for bifur1d
           -rmin            integer              smallest value for r
           -rmax            integer              largest value for r
           -factor          integer              multiplicative factor for iterates
           -ymin            integer              smallest value for y-range
           -ymax            integer              largest value for y-range
           -box             integer              line width for a box
           -brmin           integer              smallest r-value for the box
           -brmax           integer              largest r-value for the box
           -bymin           integer              smallest value for box y-range
           -bymax           integer              largest value for box y-range


        Table 10.2    The command-line options for gen1d, phase1d, phase1d2 and bifur1d


      in the series. You may also change the initial value with -x0. You can skip the
      first few initial points with the -skip option. This is useful if you only want to see
      where a map will converge to, and not how it got there.
          The program phase1d2 is identical to phase1d except that you may use the -dx
      option to specify where a second trajectory will start relative to the first trajectory.
      This is useful if you want to see how rapidly two nearby points will diverge.
          The last program for this chapter is bifur1d, which you can use to plot bifur-
      cation diagrams. You need to supply values with -rmin and -rmax to specify the
158         Nonlinear Dynamics in Simple Maps



            first and final values of r to be contained in the bifurcation plot. Similarly, you
            can change the y-ranges with -ymin and -ymax. If you wish to use this program to
            generate a PostScript image, generating a PGM file and converting it to PostScript
            with pnmtops or xv is far more eﬃcient.
                Since the source code for all of the programs in this chapter includes the file
            maps1d.c, to extend the capabilities of all of the programs, you only need to modify
            maps1d.c. Contained in this file are the function definitions for the various one-
            dimensional maps that you can use. The file is documented with an example of how
            to add your own functions.


10.8 Further Reading
             Gleick, J. (1987). Chaos. New York: Viking.
             Ruelle, D. (1993). Chance and chaos. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
             Stewart, I. (1990). Does God play dice?: The mathematics of chaos. Oxford:
             Blackwell.
11   Strange Attractors




               There is no excellent beauty that hath not some strangeness in the proportions.
                                                                            — Francis Bacon


                                                              I am strangely attracted to you.
                                                                               — Cole Porter




     I  n this chapter we will examine three well-known chaotic dynamical systems,
     with the major diﬀerence between the systems in this chapter and the logistic map
     from the previous chapter being that all of the systems in this chapter are multidi-
     mensional because the state of the systems can be characterized only by multiple
     variables instead of a single state variable. Because the dynamical systems under
     consideration have a larger state space dimension, our state space plots will typi-
     cally be plotted in two or even three dimensions. The rewarding part of all of this is
     that the state space plots in this chapter will have a fractal dimension, and therefore
     a bit of visual appeal.
         Our main approach in this chapter will be one of intuitive exploration. We will
     look at the mathematics of the chaotic systems only to the extent that you should
     be able to duplicate any of the computed figures that appear in this chapter. If
     you are less inclined to dive into the mathematics, feel free to skip the details, but
     do follow along for the remainder of the chapter, which will be largely devoted to
     illustrating how the characteristics of chaos from the last chapter universally apply
     to the systems in this chapter.
         The state space plots also illustrate what are known as strange attractors. The
     “attractor” portion of the term comes from the fact that the chaotic system gets
     attracted into a very specific and well-defined behavior, just the way the state space
     plots of limit cycle or fixed point systems show where the final system behavior will
     tend toward if given enough time. As for the “strange” portion of the term, you will
     just have to take my word for the moment that the adjective is quite appropriate.
     We’ll see why shortly.
160            Strange Attractors


      2


      1


      0


      -1


      -2
           0          20                40                60                80                100


                               Figure 11.1   The Hénon map for a = 1.29 and b = 0.3


                  The three dynamical systems in this chapter, together, are fairly representative of
               many low-dimensional chaotic systems because each has a mathematical description
               that is common to a broad class of dynamical systems. For instance, the first chaotic
               system that we will see, the Hénon map, is a system of diﬀerence equations that
               evolves in discrete time steps much like the logistic map from the last chapter. After
               that, we will see the Lorenz attractor, which is described by a system of ordinary
               diﬀerential equations and is, therefore, continuous in time. Finally, we will see the
               Mackey-Glass system, which is described by a single delay-diﬀerential equation that
               combines discrete and continuous dynamics into one form.


11.1 The Hénon Attractor
               The Hénon map was discovered by Michel Hénon, who was investigating the prop-
               erties of two-dimensional functions that have the same characteristics as more com-
               plicated systems. The Hénon map is a discrete two-dimensional map defined by the
               equations

                                              xt+1   = a − x2t + byt
                                              yt+1   = xt ,

                where a and b are constant parameters that determine whether the system is chaotic
               or not. A common setting for the parameters is a = 1.29 and b = 0.3, which gives
               the Hénon system chaotic dynamics. To compute the time evolution of the Hénon
               system, we begin with two initial values, x0 and y0 , that can be chosen randomly
               so as to give a unique starting location. Virtually any value between -1 and 1 is a
161   Strange Attractors



      safe starting place for both x0 and y0 . With the initial values determined, we can
      compute the next values, x1 and y1 , and so on.
         Figure 11.1 shows xt plotted against t for 100 points. The time series is ex-
      tremely erratic because the system is in a chaotic regime; however, near t = 40
      there appears to be momentary stability. This brief period of stability is due to an
      embedded unstable fixed point that is contained within the chaotic attractor. We
      can analytically find the location of the fixed point by setting xt+1 , xt , and yt to the
      same value, say xF , which gives the quadratic equation −x2F + (b − 1)xF + a = 0.
      Solving for xF yields
                              1/          0               1
                        xF =      b − 1 + (b − 1)2 + 4a = 0.838486 · · · .
                              2
      If you look at the value of the Hénon time series near t = 40, you will see that
      it is very close to the analytical fixed point. Since the fixed point is unstable, the
      system eventually diverges from it. What is happening is very similar to what would
      happen if you tried to balance a pencil on its point; you may get it to sort of hover
      in place for a fraction of a second, but the tiniest of nudges will knock the pencil
      over.
          Figure 11.2 shows the state space1 of the Hénon map with yt plotted against
      xt . Each subsequent state space plot enlarges the boxed section from the previous
      image. This is a strange attractor. Since the state of the Hénon map consists of
      two variables, plotting the long-term values of yt against xt illustrates the type of
      behavior that evolves when the system is iterated for many steps. Zooming into the
      attractor reveals more and more detail, which is just as we would expect a fractal
      to behave. In theory, we could zoom into the attractor forever, never finding an end
      to the detail. This fractal nature is the essence of the “strangeness” of a strange
      attractor.
          Like the logistic map, the Hénon map goes through a cascade of period doublings
      when either a or b is varied. Figure 11.3 shows the bifurcation diagram for the
      Hénon map for the specified values of a and b. As with the logistic map, many
      period doublings are visible at this scale. It would also be possible to zoom into
      regions of the bifurcation diagram to discover self-similar areas. Near the right-
      hand side of the bifurcation diagram a period-7 limit cycle emerges from within the
      chaos, only to go through further period doublings and move back into chaos.
          Looking at the Hénon map in the chaotic regime and considering the fractal
      nature of the state space plot, we become faced with the following questions: Why
      does the Hénon map converge to this particular, irregularly shaped, fractal attrac-
      tor? Why not some other shape? What, exactly, does the attractor represent? To
      answer these question in an intuitive manner, we will perform an experiment that
      will reveal some clues for us. Since the state space diagram that we’ve plotted is
         1 It may very well be more intuitive to plot x versus y . Nevertheless, I have swapped the
                                                       t        t
      variables for purely esthetic reasons.
162   Strange Attractors




                     Figure 11.2   The Hénon attractor viewed from many scales

       1.75




      -1.75

              0.5                                                                           1.4



      Figure 11.3     A bifurcation diagram of the Hénon map for a varying from 0.5 to 1.4, and
      b set to 0.3
163   Strange Attractors



      really just a very fine grid, suppose we place a square at the center of the state
      space. This square will itself be a small grid of points. Now, for each point in
      the square, transform the current point into a new point by passing it through the
      Hénon map’s equations. If we do the same transformation for each point, and then
      plot all of the new points, we can see how the Hénon map “warps” the original
      square into another shape. Similarly, we can take the new shape and transform the
      whole thing by the same process again, and so on.
          Figure 11.4 shows the first five transformations for warping a square via the
      Hénon map. Notice how at each stage we can clearly see the stretching and folding
      operations, as discussed in the previous chapter when we made an analogy between
      making pastry and making chaos. Moreover, the stretching and folding have the
      eﬀect of spreading the original square all over the state space of the system. Had
      we used a smaller square, it would have taken a few more steps to get a figure that
      looks like the real attractor; yet, no matter how small we make the initial square,
      the stretching and folding operations will eventually cause the square to converge
      to the same attractor.
          Another interesting fact revealed by this experiment is that the Hénon attractor
      consists of exactly those points that, when transformed by the Hénon map’s equa-
      tions, stay on the attractor. In other words, the Hénon attractor is invariant in
      the Hénon map’s equations. Recall from Chapter 7 that an aﬃne transformation
      fractal has the property that for any point on the fractal, the transformed point is
      also on the fractal. We can see this same property in the Hénon attractor.
          The last property of the Hénon map that we will examine involves the short-
      term and long-term predictability of the system. Suppose that we wanted to see
      what the relationship was between previous states and future states of the Hénon
      map. Ignoring the yt term for the moment, if we look at state pairs in the form
      of (xt , xt+m ), then the complexity of the resulting plot in some ways tells us how
      related the future points are to the previous points. For the case of m = 1, we get
      the familiar state space plot that we saw earlier, since yt+1 = xt . Looking at any
      of the previous plots for this case, we can see that if we were supplied with some
      value of xt , we could make a fairly accurate guess of xt+1 by looking only at the
      state space plot (and not cheating by using the formulas). The only problem that
      we would have in this prediction scheme is that for some xt value, it is possible
      for there to be multiple valid values of xt+1 ; thus, when faced with this ambiguity,
      we would have to guess one of the possible values. Also note that if we had yt
      in addition to xt , then the ambiguity would be removed and we could make an
      extremely accurate guess for xt+1 .
          For larger values of m, plotting out the “delayed” state space plot reveals a
      form that is inevitably more complicated because each iteration of the Hénon map
      stretches and folds the attractor even more. Figure 11.5 shows the delayed state
      space plots for various values of m. In the final plot, with m equal to 100, we see
      that the state space has become, for all practical purposes, uncorrelated with itself.
164   Strange Attractors




      Figure 11.4 Recursively warping the points of a square by the Hénon transformation,
      for 0 through 5 steps




          Figure 11.5      Plotting xt versus xt+m with m equal to 1, 2, 3, 10, 20, and 100
165           Strange Attractors



              In fact, the data from the last plot could pass most tests for randomness, even
              though they are derived from a deterministic process. This property of the Hénon
              attractor is very similar to the way the logistic map, when recursively composed
              with itself, forms an extremely complicated function surface with an exponential
              number of humps.
                 In Chapter 13, we will dissect the Hénon attractor in even greater detail to show
              an amazing technique for controlling chaos.


11.2 A Brief Introduction to Calculus
              Portions of the remainder of this chapter depend on the reader’s possessing a basic
              understanding of calculus. This section gives a brief but suﬃcient introduction
              to the topic, but is by no means a substitute for an advanced textbook. Readers
              already familiar with calculus may wish to proceed to the next section.
                  Calculus was invented by Isaac Newton around 1666 and then invented a second
              time by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz about ten years later.2 Calculus is most useful
              for describing how physical systems behave over time. The canonical example is of
              a cannonball being fired in the air, which always travels in a parabolic arc.
                  Figure 11.6 shows three graphs that relate various attributes of the cannonball to
              time. The top graph shows how the height of the ball changes over time, while the
              second and third graphs describe the velocity and acceleration. Calculus provides
              an elegant technique for converting information about one of these attributes into
              information about another attribute using two basic operations: integration and
              diﬀerentiation. Both operations can be calculated analytically or numerically. An
              analytical calculation is an exact transformation of one equation into another that
              yields a perfectly accurate result, while a numerical calculation is an estimate of
              the analytical result that is prone to having errors. Analytical solutions are always
              preferred over numerical, but often analytical solutions are unknown or impossible.
              The analytical version of the diﬀerentiation operation is relatively easy to perform,
              but the numerical version is very error-prone. On the other hand, integration is
              extremely hard to perform analytically but fairly easy to do numerically.
                  To make the example of the cannonball more concrete, suppose the height of the
              cannonball is described by the function h(t). The velocity at some point in time
              can then be approximated by the diﬀerence equation (h(t + ∆t) − h(t))/∆t, which
              estimates the slope of the function near a specific point in time. (This is, in fact, the
              numerical version of diﬀerentiation.) The accuracy of the estimate is determined
              by the size of the time increment, ∆t, with smaller values, in general, providing
                 2 Newton was a rather secretive fellow who did his best to keep much of calculus a secret. Only

              when people started crediting Leibniz with its invention did Newton step forward. A bitter feud
              ensued that lasted decades and consumed much of Newton’s energies.
166   Strange Attractors




                  150


                  100
         Height
                  50


                   0
                        0                                                  5                              10
                                                                         Time




                                                              Differentiate                   Integrate




                                   50



                        Velocity
                                    0



                                   -50

                                         0                                        5                            10
                                                                                Time




                                                              Differentiate                   Integrate




                                                        10



                                         Acceleration
                                                         0


                                                        -10


                                                              0                          5                          10
                                                                                       Time




      Figure 11.6 The two basic operations of calculus: diﬀerentiation and integration. Figure
      adapted from (Stewart, 1995).
167   Strange Attractors



        The Oldest Profession                                                        Digression 11.1

         A doctor, an architect, and a computer scientist were arguing about whose profession
         was the oldest. In the course of their arguments, they got all the way back to the
         Garden of Eden, whereupon the doctor said, “The medical profession is clearly the
         oldest, because Eve was made from Adam’s rib, as the story goes, and that was a
         simply incredible surgical feat.”

         The architect did not agree. He said, “But if you look at the Garden itself, in the
         beginning there was chaos and void, and out of that, the Garden and the world were
         created. So God must have been an architect.”

         The computer scientist, who had listened to all of this said, “Yes, but where do you
         think the chaos came from?”

         — From fortune




      more accurate estimates. Ideally, we would like to make ∆t equal to 0, but doing so
      causes a problem because we cannot properly divide something by 0. The analytical
      version of diﬀerentiation allows you compute the slope of a function at a point as if
      you were allowed to set ∆t to 0. The details of how it works are not too important
      for our purposes; suﬃce it to say that with analytical diﬀerentiation, one can easily
      take a function that describes the height of a cannonball and convert it into another
      function that describes the velocity, which, in turn, can be diﬀerentiated again to
      yield a function that describes the cannonball’s acceleration.
          Integration is the reverse of diﬀerentiation. With integration, you can take
      a function that describes a cannonball’s speed and convert it into a function that
      describes its height. The process of numerical integration is very similar to iterating
      a discrete time equation. In general, to integrate some quantity, say h for height, we
      would need to know how the height changes over time. We represent this information
      by a diﬀerential equation,3 which, in the case of our cannonball, is dh/dt = 50 − 10t
      (this is also the function that is plotted in the middle graph of Figure 11.6). We
      also need to know the starting condition, h0 , that is, the initial height. Given the
      initial position, and the way a cannonball moves in time, we can now approximate
      the successive positions of the cannonball by iterating the equation
                                                                dh
                                             ht+1 = ht + ∆t        ,
                                                                dt
         3 While the diﬀerential equation that follows is true to calculus, it is a slight simplification, in

      that real physical issues such as Earth’s actual gravitational pull on a ball, are ignored.
168          Strange Attractors



             which is known as Euler’s method for numerical integration, and uses the time
             increment, ∆t, which plays a role similar to the one it did in diﬀerentiation. This
             method is the simplest technique for performing numerical integration, but it is also
             the least accurate and is, therefore, rarely used for serious calculations. However,
             it is suﬃcient for our purposes, and it also provides a good intuitive feel for how
             integration really works.
                 Diﬀerential equations describe how forces act on an object. With a diﬀerential
             equation and a method of integration, physicists will often attempt to predict the
             future position or motion of an object. If an analytical solution to a diﬀerential
             equation is known in advance (as with the parabola for the cannonball), then the
             future of an object can be perfectly determined with a single equation. If, however,
             no analytical solution exists (as with most configurations of three gravitational
             bodies—the Three Body Problem), then a physicist must be content to solve the
             problem numerically, which amounts to approximating the very near future, using
             that approximation to guess at the next time step, and so on.
                 The beauty of physics is that simple diﬀerential equations can produce aston-
             ishingly complicated behavior. It was Newton’s most profound discovery that the
             forces that describe objects in motion are much simpler than the motions them-
             selves.


11.3 The Lorenz Attractor
             Consider a closed chamber of air that has a heat source at the bottom. Since the
             air at the bottom of our chamber is closer to the heat source, the lower the air, the
             hotter it gets. As gas heats up, it expands, becomes lighter, tends to float toward
             the top of the chamber, and gradually cools as it moves away from the heat source.
             Now, if the temperature diﬀerence between the gas at the top and the bottom of the
             chamber is small, the hot air will gradually rise to the top in a somewhat predictable
             manner. However, if we increase the temperature of the heat source, resulting in a
             temperature diﬀerence that is more pronounced, then the rising hot air and falling
             cooler air will form a circulating flow known as convection. Convection is seen in
             atmospheric activity when the sun warms a layer of air closer to the surface of
             Earth, resulting in a similar circular flow.
                 In 1962, Edward Lorenz was studying a simplified model of convection flow. His
             system contained three state variables to represent various physical quantities. For
             Lorenz’s computer model of the system, he could plug arbitrary values into the
             equations, let them iterate for a while, and then stop the simulation. Thus, Lorenz
             was essentially playing with a very simple “toy” weather system in a computer,
             with Lorenz being in the godlike position of having the ability to alter the weather
             on a whim.
169                Strange Attractors



          10

           5

      x    0

           -5

          -10
            1500                                         2000                                        2500
                                                           t


                        Figure 11.7     Two time evolutions of x with an infinitesimal initial diﬀerence



                       While running a particularly interesting simulation of his system, Lorenz had
                   to stop the system prematurely. Later, Lorenz wanted to resume the simulation a
                   little bit before where he had let it stop; thus, with printout in hand, he entered
                   in the last known values of the three state variables and continued the simulation.
                   To Lorenz’s surprise, the simulation continued as it had before, but with a slight
                   deviation in how the state variables changed over time. Small diﬀerences become
                   large diﬀerences, and in short time the system was nowhere near where it had been
                   before. Figure 11.7 shows how an infinitesimal diﬀerence in initial conditions can
                   cause two trajectories to diverge.
                       Having read the last chapter, you already know why the system deviated over
                   time. However, in 1962 everyone “knew” that all dynamical systems ultimately
                   fall into predictable patterns. The fact that Lorenz’s system had a measly three
                   variables just added to the confusion: If something this simple could be so patho-
                   logical, what about more complex dynamical systems? Eventually, Lorenz retraced
                   his steps to determine the source of his computer “glitch.” As it happened, Lorenz’s
                   printout of the state variables displayed the numbers only to a fixed number of dig-
                   its. In reality, the computer stored the numbers with slightly more precision then
                   what was displayed in the printout. So, when Lorenz reentered the values of the
                   state variables, he essentially truncated the last few digits. However, keep in mind
                   that the error introduced by truncating the numbers was really only on the order
                   of one part in a thousand or so.
                       Lorenz wrote up his experience for a journal article, but unfortunately for the
                   rest of us, it took about a decade or so for his discovery to become known in the
                   physics and mathematics communities. In the remainder of this section we will look
                   at the Lorenz system in greater detail.
170   Strange Attractors



         The Lorenz system consists of the three diﬀerential equations:

                      dx            dy                    dz
                         = ay − ax,    = bx − y − zx, and    = xy − cz.
                      dt            dt                    dt

      Each of a, b, and c is a constant parameter that we can adjust to alter the behavior
      of the system. Since the variable t represents time, it may be tempting to think
      of the x, y, and z terms as having a spatial interpretation. This assumption is not
      quite correct. The x, y, and z terms actually refer to the physical dynamics of
      a convection model: x represents the convective motion, y represents a tempera-
      ture diﬀerence, and z represents the distortion of the temperature profile, but the
      physical interpretation is not important for our purposes.
          Figure 11.8 shows a typical time evolution of the three variables with a, b, and c
      fixed to 5, 15, and 1, respectively. By varying the three parameters, we could force
      the system into a cascade of bifurcations, as we did with the logistic and Hénon
      maps. The Lorenz system also possesses sensitivity to initial conditions; as Lorenz
      himself found out, any slight change exponentially grows in size over time. Not so
      visible, but present nevertheless, are periodic cycles embedded in the dynamics of
      the system, which also happens to be ergodic. Looking at the three graphs in the
      figure, if you were to draw a vertical line straight through all three, it would intersect
      each trajectory at exactly one point. Imagine that we could slide the vertical line
      to the right, thus taking a brief snapshot in time of the evolution of the system. By
      interpreting each of the state variables as a coordinate in space, the time evolution
      of the three variables can be represented by a one-dimensional trajectory flowing
      through a three-dimensional space.
          This plotting technique is demonstrated in Figures 11.9 and 11.10, which show
      diﬀerent views of the Lorenz strange attractor. The important thing to keep in
      mind is that the resulting plots do not represent the spatial attributes of the air
      flow, only the physical parameters that were mentioned earlier. Nevertheless, the
      plots are wonderfully beautiful. Similar to the Hénon attractor, the Lorenz attractor
      has a fractal dimension, and one could view this property by zooming into smaller
      and smaller regions of the attractor. Since the Lorenz attractor looks vaguely like a
      butterfly, it would be interesting to see how regular the flow of the attractor is as it
      weaves from one “wing” to the other. Sometimes the flow will move from one wing
      to the other, then back to the first. Other times it may move around one wing for a
      large number of loops, then quickly jump to the other wing, and so on. It has been
      conjectured, but not proved, that for any finite sequence of integers that are not
      too large, say 7, 3, 12, 4, . . ., there exists a trajectory on the Lorenz attractor that
      loops around one half of the attractor for the first number of times, switches to the
      other half for the second number of loops, and so on. If you watch the flow of the
      attractor on a computer screen, you can easily see some very complicated patterns
      emerge.
171   Strange Attractors




            10

             5

      x      0

             -5

            -10
                  0                             1000                               2000
                                                  t




            10

             5

      y      0

             -5

            -10
                  0                             1000                               2000
                                                  t




            25

            20

        z   15

            10

             5
                  0                             1000                               2000
                                                  t



              Figure 11.8   The time evolution of x, y, and z from the Lorenz system
172       Strange Attractors




  z                                              z




                                             y                                                y
      x                                                   x

          Figure 11.9 A dual-image stereogram of the Lorenz attractor: To view, stare at the
          center of the two images and cross your eyes until the two images merge. Allow your eyes
          to relax so that they can refocus.




                                         y            z




                   x                                                     y


           Figure 11.10        Two more views of the Lorenz strange attractor from diﬀerent angles
173                Strange Attractors



         1.4

         1.2

          1
  x(t)
         0.8

         0.6

         0.4

               0               100             200              300              400              500
                                                         t


                           Figure 11.11    The time evolution of x from the Mackey-Glass system


11.4 The Mackey-Glass System
                   Recall that the Hénon and Lorenz systems had two and three variables that changed
                   over time, respectively. The last chaotic system that we will look at in this chapter
                   has only a single time-varying variable; however, this last system turns out to be
                   many times more complex than both the Hénon and Lorenz systems.
                      The Mackey-Glass system consists of a single delay-diﬀerential equation that
                   was originally used as a model of white blood cell production:

                                              dx     ax(t − τ )
                                                 =                  − bx(t),
                                              dt   1 + x10 (t − τ )

                   where a and b are typically fixed at 0.2 and 0.1, and τ is a special parameter that
                   we can use to alter how pathological the resulting time series is. Since this is a
                   delay-diﬀerential equation, to compute the corresponding time series, we need to
                   numerically integrate the equation to simulate a continuous stream of data, but we
                   must also maintain a history of values because of the delay term, x(t − τ ), that
                   appears in the equation. For now, we will use a τ of 17, which makes the system
                   chaotic. Making τ smaller could force the system into fixed point or limit cycle
                   behavior, and increasing the size of τ would make the system even more chaotic.
                   Figure 11.11 shows 500 time steps from the Mackey-Glass system.
                       The x(t − τ ) terms mean that we should use the value of x from τ time steps
                   in the past. This is the “delay” portion of the delay-diﬀerential equation, and it is
                   the reason why the Mackey-Glass system is so chaotic. For instance, in the Hénon
                   and Lorenz systems, for every possible state of the system there is exactly one
                   history of previous states that can account for the current state. This is not the
174   Strange Attractors



      case for the Mackey-Glass system. For example, say the state of the system is at
      x(t+1), and you want to know how it got there. To divine this knowledge you would
      need to know the values of x(t) and x(t − τ ), which are dependent upon x(t − 1),
      x(t−τ −1), and x(t−2τ −1), which depend on x(t−2), x(t−τ −2), x(t−2τ −2), and
      x(t − 3τ − 2) and so on. In fact, the Mackey-Glass system is so complex that, with
      a few exceptions, you would essentially need an infinite amount of previous history
      to describe the state perfectly. With this property of being infinitely complex, the
      Mackey-Glass system illustrates what is arguably the most important property of
      chaotic systems: Chaotic systems with nearly infinite complexity may often collapse
      into a lower-dimensional attractor. We will explore exactly what this means more
      toward the end of this section and in the next chapter.
          Our main goal in this section is to see how one can reconstruct and characterize
      the behavior of a dynamical system that operates via an unknown process. This
      is the classic “black box” problem, in which you can observe some measurement
      change over time, but you are not sure which laws determine how the measurement
      changes, or even what the measurement means. In other words, you do not have a
      diﬀerential, diﬀerence, or delay-diﬀerential equation at your disposal that perfectly
      describes your system. All you have are data, and lots of them. To make matters
      worse, in many “black box” systems, one can observe just a single time-varying
      quantity, but it may be known in advance that there are many other time-varying
      quantities that you cannot measure. How, then, do you go about trying to recover
      the dynamics of the system? Is it even possible to do so as the problem has been
      described?
          This question is especially relevant to the problem of time-series forecasting.
      As a specific example, no one really understands how the stock market works. If
      you did, you’d be rich. Nevertheless, we should appreciate the fact that the stock
      market is a function not only obvious of things, like trade deficits, the budget deficit,
      the prime rate, and so on, but also of many things that we can’t measure simply
      because we don’t know any better. Is it possible to characterize the dynamics of the
      system by considering only a single time-dependent variable? For the stock market
      example, the question boils down to whether or not a long history of the S&P 500
      is suﬃcient information to predict the future of the S&P 500.
          For deterministic processes (and the stock market may or may not be among
      them) there is a marvelous tool known as delayed coordinate embedding, which was
      rigorously formulated as a mathematical theorem by Floris Takens. In a nutshell,
      the embedding theorem tells us that if the dimension of the underlying attractor of
      the system fits in a D-dimensional space, then a history of length 2D + 1 can be
      used to reconstruct the attractor. In other words, at each time, t, we can examine
      x(t), x(t−∆), . . ., x(t−2D∆) to reconstruct the underlying system dynamics. Note
      that Takens’s theorem doesn’t tell us anything about how to pick ∆, which specifies
      the spacing of our samples, but simply postulates that for some ∆ the embedding
      will work.
175                  Strange Attractors




    x(t-2∆)                                                    x(t-2∆)




                                                   x(t-∆)                                              x(t-∆)
              x(t)                                                       x(t)



                     Figure 11.12 A dual-image stereogram of the a three-dimensional embedding of the
                     Mackey-Glass system. Here ∆ is set to 6. To view, stare at the center of the two images
                     and cross your eyes until the two images merge. Allow your eyes to relax so that they can
                     refocus.




 x(t-∆)                                                     x(t-2∆)




                             x(t)                                                 x(t)



                     Figure 11.13    Two dimensional embeddings of the Mackey-Glass system, with ∆ set to
                     6
176          Strange Attractors



                 If we apply this tool to the Mackey-Glass system, Takens’s theorem essentially
             tells us that a bigger history is better, but for some finite choice of 2D + 1, we
             can approximately reconstruct the underlying attractor. Figures 11.12 and 11.13
             show our delayed coordinate embedding for the Mackey-Glass system. In reality,
             it would have been preferable to have used a four- or even five-dimensional history
             window; however, plotting a three-dimensional space on a two-dimensional sheet of
             paper strains the situation as it is. Using our previous example of sliding a line
             across a time series, if we were to use a three-pronged fork instead of a line, then
             the points where the three prongs intersect the time series determine the x, y, and
             z coordinates.
                 As Figures 11.12 and 11.13 illustrate, very complicated systems can often col-
             lapse into behaviors that can be characterized by low-dimensional attractors. While
             Figures 11.12 and 11.13 do not perfectly describe the dynamics of the Mackey-Glass
             system, we can tell that they provide a large amount of information regarding the
             system’s dynamics because of the amount of structure in the state space plots.
             Had there been no information in the embedding, the state space plot would have
             looked random. Instead, we have structure. In the next chapter we will look at a
             class of dynamical systems that are related to many processes found in chemistry,
             economics, and biology. The amazing thing about this class is that most of these
             systems have a near infinite number of degrees of freedom (that is, they are very,
             very complicated), yet their behaviors still collapse into a very low-dimensional
             attractor.


11.5 Further Exploration

             All of the data or images in this chapter were produced with one of henon, henbif,
             henwarp, lorenz, or mg. In addition, the excellent and free plotting program
             gnuplot was used for the three-dimensional images. There is also a program named
             rossler included with these programs that plots the Rossler attractor, another sys-
             tem of diﬀerential equations that is very similar to the Lorenz system. Each program
             has many options, and most of the programs have some options in common with
             other programs. Hence, I will only describe the most important options that are
             unique to a particular program in detail.
                The first program, henon, allows the user to plot the state space of the Hénon
             system in a variety of ways. Its command-line options are listed in Table 11.1.
             With no options, henon will produce a plot similar to the first plot in Figure 11.2.
             To zoom in on a specific region of the attractor, as done later in Figure 11.2, use
             the -ulx, -uly, and -lly options. The -delay option can be used to plot delayed
             versions of the state space, as was done in Figure 11.5. Finally, the -data switch
             will force the program to generate raw data points from system, which is useful if
             you wish to make a time-series plot, as done in Figure 11.1.
177   Strange Attractors



           Option Name        Option Type       Option Meaning
           -width             integer           width of the plot in pixels
           -height            integer           height of the plot in pixels
           -skip              integer           number of initial points to skip
           -swap              switch            swap the x and y axis?
           -points            integer           number of points to plot
           -delay             integer           time steps to delay for
           -A                 double            value of the A parameter
           -B                 double            value of the B parameter
           -ulx               double            upper-left corner x-coordinate
           -uly               double            upper-left corner y-coordinate
           -lly               double            lower-left corner y-coordinate
           -box               integer           line width for a box
           -bulx              double            box’s upper-left x-coordinate
           -buly              double            box’s upper-left y-coordinate
           -blly              double            box’s lower-left y-coordinate
           -data              switch            don’t plot but print points
           -inv               switch            invert all colors?
           -xmag              integer           magnification factor for X Windows
           -term              string            how to plot points


                           Table 11.1   Command-line options for henon



          The next program, henbif, takes the command-line options summarized in Ta-
      ble 11.2 and can be used to make bifurcation diagrams of the Hénon system like
      the one in Figure 11.3. The diagrams can have either parameter varying (a or b),
      by using the -ab switch. The range of the varied parameter is set by using -abmin
      and -abmax. To zoom in on the specific region of a bifurcation diagram, you will
      also need to use -ymin and -ymax.
          Table 11.3 lists the command-line options for henwarp, a program that warps
      a square via the Hénon system equations (as done in Figure 11.4). The square is
      understood to be centered at the origin. The length of each edge of the square is
      determined by the -len option, which has a value that is understood to be in pixels;
      thus, this value should be less than both the width and the height of the plot. The
      program will transform every pixel in the square by the Hénon system equations a
      number of times specified by the -count option.
          Table 11.4 lists the options for lorenz and rossler, which are identical except
      for the underlying dynamical systems that each uses. The programs will plot any
      state variable against any other variable or any delayed state variable. The exact
      form of the plot is determined by the values supplied to the -xp and -yp options.
178   Strange Attractors



           Option Name         Option Type       Option Meaning
           -width              integer           width of the plot in pixels
           -height             integer           height of the plot in pixels
           -skip               integer           number of initial points to skip
           -abmin              double            smallest value for A (or B)
           -abmax              double            largest value for A (or B)
           -ab                 switch            if TRUE plot for A; B otherwise
           -A                  double            value of the A parameter
           -B                  double            value of the B parameter
           -factor             double            multiplicative factor for iterates
           -ymin               double            smallest value for y range
           -ymax               double            largest value for y range
           -box                integer           line width for a box
           -brmin              double            smallest r-value for the box
           -brmax              double            largest r-value for the box
           -bymin              double            smallest value for box y range
           -bymax              double            largest value for box y range
           -inv                switch            invert all colors?
           -xmag               integer           magnification factor for X Windows
           -term               string            how to plot points


                           Table 11.2   Command-line options for henbif


           Option Name         Option Type       Option Meaning
           -width              integer           width of the plot in pixels
           -height             integer           height of the plot in pixels
           -swap               switch            swap the x and y axis
           -len                integer           length of edge of square
           -count              integer           number of transformations
           -A                  double            value of the A parameter
           -B                  double            value of the B parameter
           -ulx                double            upper-left corner x-coordinate
           -uly                double            upper-left corner y-coordinate
           -lly                double            lower-left corner y-coordinate
           -inv                switch            invert all colors?
           -xmag               integer           magnification factor for X Windows
           -term               string            how to plot points


                           Table 11.3   Command-line options for henwarp
179   Strange Attractors



           Option Name         Option Type        Option Meaning
           -width              integer            width of the plot in pixels
           -height             integer            height of the plot in pixels
           -skip               integer            number of initial points to skip
           -points             integer            number of points to plot
           -A                  double             value of the A parameter
           -B                  double             value of the B parameter
           -C                  double             value of the C parameter
           -delta              integer            time delay term
           -dt                 double             time step
           -x0                 double             initial X value
           -y0                 double             initial Y value
           -z0                 double             initial Z value
           -data               switch             don’t plot but print points
           -xp                 string             x-coordinate for plot
           -yp                 string             y-coordinate for plot
           -factor             double             auto-scale expansion factor
           -inv                switch             invert all colors?
           -xmag               integer            magnification factor for X Windows
           -term               string             how to plot points


                   Table 11.4    Command-line options for lorenz and rossler


      Both of these command-line options must take a value that is from one of the strings:
      x(t), y(t), z(t), x(t-delta), y(t-delta), or z(t-delta).4 For example, the
      command:
            lorenz -xp "x(t)" -yp "z(t)"
      will plot the state space of x(t) versus z(t), and the command:
            lorenz -xp "y(t)" -yp "y(t-delta)"
      will plot y(t) versus y(t−∆), a delayed coordinate embedding for the Lorenz system,
      with ∆ being determined by the -delta option.
         The plotting ranges for these programs are automatically determined by the
      programs by examining the scales of the initially skipped points. If your plots
      appear to be oﬀ-centered, you may need to increase the number of skipped points
      with the -skip option. Moreover, the -factor option can be used to increase or
      decrease the amount of border placed around the plots. To generate raw data, the
      -data switch should be set.
        4 On UNIX systems, you may need to enclose the strings in double quotes to prevent your

      command shell from interpreting the parentheses as special characters.
180         Strange Attractors



                 Option Name         Option Type       Option Meaning
                 -width              integer           width of the plot in pixels
                 -height             integer           height of the plot in pixels
                 -skip               integer           number of initial points to skip
                 -points             integer           number of points to plot
                 -delta              integer           time steps to delay for
                 -tau                integer           value of the Tau parameter
                 -A                  double            value of the A parameter
                 -B                  double            value of the B parameter
                 -dt                 double            time step size
                 -x0                 double            initial X value
                 -factor             double            auto-scale expansion factor
                 -data               switch            don’t plot but print points
                 -inv                switch            invert all colors?
                 -xmag               integer           magnification factor for X Windows
                 -term               string            how to plot points


                                  Table 11.5    Command-line options for mg


               Finally, Table 11.5 lists all of the options for mg, which have identical or similar
            meaning as the options listed for lorenz and rossler. The only command-line
            option unique to mg is the -tau option, which has meaning as described in the
            previous section.


11.6 Further Reading
             Benhabib, J. (Ed.). (1992). Cycles and chaos in economic equilibrium. Princeton:
             Princeton University Press.
             Hall, N. (Ed.). (1991). Exploring chaos: A guide to the new science of disorder.
             New York: W. W. Norton & Co.
             Peitgen, H.-O., Jürgens, H., & Saupe, D. (1992). Chaos and fractals. New York:
             Springer-Verlag.
             Stewart, I. (1995). Nature’s numbers: The unreal reality of mathematical imagi-
             nation. New York: Basic Books.
             Strogatz, S. (1994). Nonlinear dynamics and chaos. New York: Addison Wesley.
12   Producer-Consumer Dynamics




                                                                 Big whorls have little whorls,
                                                                  Which feed on their velocity;
                                                          And little whorls have lesser whorls,
                                                                       And so on to viscosity.
                                                                          — L. F. Richardson


                                              Chaos often breeds life when order breeds habit.
                                                                     — Henry Brooks Adams


         Nature itself, even in chaos, cannot proceed except in an orderly and regular manner.
                                                                            — Immanuel Kant




     H    aving seen some of the main characteristics of chaos as well as a fair sample
     of the mathematical techniques used to describe them, we are now ready to see a
     form of chaos that is strongly motivated by real-world natural systems.
         In this chapter, we will examine systems that consist of producers and consumers
     interacting in cooperative and competitive ways. The canonical example is of an
     ecosystem that consists of multiple species. We will use two distinctly diﬀerent
     techniques for modeling the populations of the species. The first technique is to
     model each species as a simple function of the other species. This method makes
     no distinction between individuals in a population, in that they are all considered
     one and the same. Moreover, by reducing a whole species to a single number we are
     obviously ignoring a great deal of information that one could find in real organisms,
     such as location, age, health, and other characteristics one would normally associate
     with an individual. Nevertheless, we will see that a mere three equations (for three
     species) are suﬃcient to produce chaotic dynamics.
         The second method we will use is to model each individual of a population
     separately and then simulate the behavior of the entire system by simulating each
     individual simultaneously. This technique is exactly the opposite of the first, in
     that instead of three equations, we essentially must consider thousands at once.
182          Producer-Consumer Dynamics



                 The remarkable conclusion of the comparison is that both techniques yield sim-
             ilar results. This is a double-edged result. On the one hand, we have a mathemati-
             cally simple system producing behavior that is so complex that it defies long-term
             prediction. On the other hand, we have a mathematically complex system that by
             all accounts should be nearly random in its behavior, yet it eventually settles down
             into behavior that can be described by approximately three variables. Hence, we
             have simplicity yielding complexity and complexity yielding simplicity. In the next
             section, by way of introduction, we will explore some of the general characteristics
             of producer-consumer interactions that make this result possible.


12.1 Producer-Consumer Interactions
             Living things, almost by definition, must be capable of an endless variety of behavior
             in order to adapt to an infinite number of scenarios. Failure to adapt usually means
             death, which implies that every adaptive system must possess a form of fluidity.
             An organism’s metabolism is just one method by which creatures can alter their
             internal chemistry to deal with external pressures. At the most basic level, one can
             think of metabolic-like adaptation as a feedback process in which internal changes
             in an organism are made in direct response to external changes in the environment.
             Lower the temperature, and mammals will start to produce more heat. Flash a
             bright light or emit a loud blast, and internal mechanisms in the eyes or ears will
             dampen the input to lower the potential for sensory overload.
                 Ecosystems and economies also possess a metabolic-like thermostat that aids
             in adapting population levels to environments. Overpopulation spreads resources
             thinly and can encourage famine, causing populations to plummet. Underpopula-
             tion makes individuals resource rich and also adds some diﬃculty for predators of
             the thinned population, which enables the thinned population to grow. Even Adam
             Smith’s invisible hand, which is the force that Smith credited with adjusting a mar-
             ket’s output to meet the market’s needs, can be viewed as yet another example of
             how nature is replete with a form of built-in feedback that keeps things moving
             smoothly.
                 All of the preceding examples describe stabilizing processes that encourage sys-
             tems to find a happy equilibrium. Presumably, if resources and competitors were
             kept constant, animal population levels would stabilize to constant levels. For
             mammalian metabolism, it usually turns out that animals can maintain a rela-
             tively constant internal temperature precisely because minute adjustments of their
             internal temperature have very little eﬀect on the immediate environment. As ev-
             eryone knows, the exception to this rule is when you place many people in a small
             space. Given enough time, many bodies will increase the temperature in a small
             environment, causing people to pant and sweat in order to cool themselves.
                 The lesson here is that stabilization is easy when the state of an environment is
             mostly independent of the state of an individual. If you couple the two states, you
183          Producer-Consumer Dynamics



             get feedback, which makes each state recursively dependent on the other. Look-
             ing back at the case of animal population levels, predator-prey systems are tightly
             coupled in that it is impossible to change one state (say the prey’s population
             level) without aﬀecting another state. In fact, if we look at each individual—be it
             molecule, animal, species, or company—as a consumer and producer, that is, some-
             thing that has a functional-like input and output, then the interconnectedness of
             the world becomes much more obvious. Chemical reactions consume reactants and
             produce reagents. Animals eat plants and other animals and produce heat, waste,
             or another meal. Businesses purchase products from other companies, consume
             natural resources, and produce products and services. And populations prey on
             one another and may compete for many other resources. Everything is connected
             to everything else in an endless web of interactions so that a small ripple in one
             location can conceivably be transformed into a tidal wave elsewhere.
                 In the remainder of this chapter, we will examine predator-prey systems that
             illustrate the complexity induced by feedback in similar systems.


12.2 Predator-Prey Systems
             The simplest type of predator-prey system consists of just two species with one
             preying on the other. An example of this sort of system would be sharks and small
             fish. During World War I, fishermen refrained from fishing for small plankton-
             eating fish, which initially had the eﬀect of increasing the population. However,
             the increased small-fish population made for a well-fed shark population, which
             encouraged the shark population to increase. As the sharks’ numbers grew, they
             began to eat more of the small-fish, eventually depleting the small fish population
             to the point that the shark population could no longer sustain itself. With the
             sharks dying oﬀ from starvation, the small fish were once again able to increase
             their numbers, leading back to a situation much like where we started.
                 The above scenario is applicable to many other types of animals (foxes and
             rabbits are frequently used as examples) but is very idealized, in that it assumes
             that the small fish (or rabbits) are preyed upon only by a single species, which is
             almost certainly never the case, considering the amount of hunting done by humans
             and the ubiquity of parasites.
                 Nevertheless, in the early part of this century Vito Volterra and Alfred J. Lotka
             independently noticed the cyclic nature of population dynamics and set out to de-
             scribe the phenomenon mathematically. The Lotka-Volterra system consists of two
             diﬀerential equations, one for each species. In its simplest form the two equations
             are usually presented as
                                  dF                  dS
                                     = F (a − bS) and    = S(cF − d),
                                  dt                  dt
             where F represents the small-fish population and S represents the shark population.
184   Producer-Consumer Dynamics



      Don’t worry, we are going to go over each of the terms in detail so as to explain
      exactly what they mean. First of all, notice that each equation contains both an F
      term and an S term, which illustrates the coupled nature of the small fish and sharks.
      The four other terms, a, b, c, d, are parameters that reflect certain properties of the
      small fish and sharks. By convention, all four parameters are understood always to
      be greater than or equal to 0.
          The parameter a can be thought of as representing the reproduction rate of
      the small fish. Ignoring b for the moment and simplifying the first equation to
      dF/dt = F a, we can see that the change in the small-fish population is always
      positive and proportional to the current population, meaning that in the absence
      of predators, the small fish will always increase exponentially in numbers.1
          The second parameter, b, is proportional to the number of small fish that a shark
      can eat. Expanding dF/dt reveals the term −bF S. We can think of the product F S
      as representing the chance that a random shark will encounter a random small fish,
      since the product obviously increases with any increase in either F or S. Putting
      the whole thing back together again, the equation dF/dt = F (a − bS) means that
      the small-fish population will grow exponentially in the absence of sharks, but will
      decrease by an amount proportional to the chance that a shark and a small fish
      bump into each other.
          As for the second equation, the parameter c can be thought of as the amount
      of “energy” that a small fish supplies a shark when the shark eats it. If c is big,
      then cSF will also be large and positive, which means that the shark population
      will increase by an amount proportional to the chance that shark and small fish
      encounter one another. If c is small, then the shark population will increase more
      slowly than it would otherwise.
          The final parameter, d, represents the death rate of the sharks. If F is 0, meaning
      that there are no more small fish, then the shark population will decay exponentially.
      Putting the second equation back together, we can see that the shark population
      can increase only proportionally to the number of small fish, but that the sharks
      are also simultaneously faced with decay due to the constant death rate.
          With any set of choices for a, b, c, and d, this simplest version of the Lotka-
      Volterra system will always contain a fixed point that is located at F = d/c and
      S = a/b, since dF/dt = dS/dt = 0 at these values. However, the system will also
      have an infinite number of limit cycles that appear to orbit around the embedded
      fixed point. Perturbing either population away from the orbit will force the system
      into a diﬀerent limit cycle. This is illustrated by Figure 12.1 which shows four such
      limit cycles.
         1 It is clearly unreasonable for there to be no limit on the population of fish, given the finite

      size of the oceans, but for our purposes we can ignore this problem. However, for those curious,
      a more realistic modification to the equation is to include a logistic term that punishes a large
      small-fish population, i.e., dF/dt = F (a − bS − eF ). With no sharks, the small-fish population
      will reach equilibrium when a = eF , thus keeping a cap on the population.
185   Producer-Consumer Dynamics


                           2

                          1.8

                          1.6

                          1.4




       Shark Population
                          1.2

                           1

                          0.8

                          0.6

                          0.4

                          0.2

                           0
                                0   0.5   1     1.5          2       2.5         3        3.5
                                                Fish Population


      Figure 12.1 A simple Lotka-Volterra attractor which shows four (out of an infinite
      number of possible) limit cycles. The value of the four parameters are equal to 3.029850,
      4.094132, 1.967217, and 2.295942, which yields a fixed point at 1.1671, 0.740047.



          In any event, the fact that the fixed point location is given by F = d/c and
      S = a/b reveals a couple of surprises in terms of how the system behaves under
      certain parameter changes. For example, suppose you were responsible for managing
      a small ecosystem similar to the shark and small-fish system, and that you wished
      to increase the population level of small fish. You may be inclined to increase
      the reproduction rate (supposing you have the aquatic equivalent of the mythical
      Spanish fly); however, doing so would increase only the number of sharks, and have
      no aﬀect on the number of small fish. To increase the number of small fish, you
      would have to increase the death rate of the sharks or decrease the nutritional value
      of the small fish, which may seem very counterintuitive.
         All of this goes to show that even the simplest models of population dynamics
      reveal the delicate balance that exists in almost all ecological systems. In the next
      section, we are going to look at a generalized version of the Lotka-Volterra system
      that can be used to model the interaction among an arbitrary number of species.
186          Producer-Consumer Dynamics


       x3                                              x3




  x1                                              x1
                                x2                                                  x2



             Figure 12.2 A dual-image stereogram of the three-species Lotka-Volterra chaotic at-
             tractor: To view, stare at the center of the two images and cross your eyes until the two
             images merge. Allow your eyes to relax so that they can refocus.



12.3 Generalized Lotka-Volterra Systems

             In this section, we will consider three-species predator-prey systems so that we can
             see chaos in motion. If you think about how continuous dynamical systems work,
             with a point in an n-dimensional space representing the complete state of the system,
             then it should be clear that continuous chaos (as opposed to the discrete chaos found
             in the logistic or Hénon maps) requires three dimensions to flow through. Here is
             why. Suppose you had only two dimensions for the state space. For something to
             be chaotic, it not only must never repeat itself, but it also must return to a state
             that is very similar to a state that it has been at before. Since we are talking
             about continuous systems, we can represent the motion of the system by drawing
             a very long line on a sheet of paper. If you scribble long enough on some paper, it
             should become apparent that there is no way to meet these two constraints in only
             two dimensions because we are not allowed to intersect the line with itself; doing
             so would be to return to an old state, that is, to repeat. Hence, to have chaos,
             we really need to be able to “jump” over lines in a third dimension. This is why
             continuous chaos can exist only in three- or more dimensions.
                With this in mind, we are now going to transform the previous Lotka-Volterra
             system into another form that is more powerful and can account for more species.
             There are many ways to do this, and many scientists have done so with their own
             unique twists. However, I am going to use a model discovered by A. Arneodo,
             P. Coullet, and C. Tresser. To start, we can write the whole system of ordinary
187          Producer-Consumer Dynamics



             diﬀerential equations for an n-species predator-prey system as
                                                     n
                                           dxi      !
                                               = xi     Aij (1 − xj ),
                                            dt      j=1

             where xi represents the ith species and Aij represents the eﬀect that species j has
             on species i and plays the same role that the parameters in the last section did.
             Representing the Aij terms as a matrix, we can list all of the parameters as
                                 ⎡                  ⎤ ⎡                       ⎤
                                   A11 A12 A13               0.5     0.5 0.1
                            A = ⎣ A21 A22 A23 ⎦ = ⎣ −0.5 −0.1 0.1 ⎦ .
                                   A31 A32 A33                 α     0.1 0.1

             The values listed in the matrix above were found by Arneodo, Coullet, and Tresser
             to have chaotic dynamics. Notice that the whole system is now parameterized by
             a single variable, α, which we can set to make the system behave in any number
             of ways. Setting α to 1.5 forces the system into chaotic behavior. The attractor at
             this value is shown in Figure 12.2. The time evolution of the three species is shown
             in Figure 12.3.
                By using α as a knob, we can see how the generalized Lotka-Volterra system can
             display a wide variety of behavior. This is illustrated more concretely in Figure 12.4,
             which shows the attractor plotted for five diﬀerent values of α. In Figure 12.4a, α has
             been set to 0.75, which gives the system a stable fixed point attractor. As you can
             see, the system spirals into the fixed point, eventually dampening out completely.
             In Figure 12.4b, α is set to 1.2, which puts the system into simple periodic behavior.
             There are versions of the two-species Lotka-Volterra system that can show this type
             of behavior, but they are more complicated than the system from the last section.
                In Figure 12.4c, α is set to 1.32, which shows us the first period doubling. The
             state-space portrait of the system shows a twist in the loop that was not there
             when it was a simple periodic orbit. Increasing α to 1.387 gives us a stable period-4
             attractor (Figure 12.4d), which looks much like the twisted version of the period-2
             system. The cascade of period doublings continues. By the time α gets to 1.5, the
             system is wildly chaotic (Figure 12.4e).


12.4 Individual-Based Ecology
             The Lotka-Volterra model takes a sort of species-eye view of the world by ignoring
             variations in individuals and assuming that all members of a species are either
             identical or similar enough that diﬀerences can be safely ignored. In this chapter, we
             will use a modeling technique that is relatively new to the discipline of ecology. The
             technique depends on a type of computing machine known as a cellular automaton,
             which happens to be the focus of Chapter 15, and is individual-based in that it
188        Producer-Consumer Dynamics




            2

           1.5

      x1    1

           0.5

            0
                 0                                    1000                                   2000
                                                      Time



           2.5
            2
           1.5
      x2
            1
           0.5

            0
                 0                                    1000                                   2000
                                                      Time




           4.5

            3
      x3
           1.5

            0
                 0                 500                1000                1500               2000
                                                      Time


                     Figure 12.3   Population levels for the three-species Lotka-Volterra system
189              Producer-Consumer Dynamics



                 x3
                                                     1.3
                                                     1.2
      (a)                                            1.1
                                                x1
                                                      1

                                                     0.9

                                                     0.8
            x1                                             0                   500                       1000
                                                                               Time
                                  x2
                 x3
                                                      2


      (b)                                            1.5
                                                x1
                                                      1


                                                     0.5
            x1                                             0                   500                       1000
                                                                               Time
                                  x2
                 x3
                                                      2

                                                     1.5
      (c)
                                                x1    1

                                                     0.5

                                                      0
            x1                                             0                   500                       1000
                                                                               Time
                                  x2
                 x3
                                                      2

                                                     1.5
      (d)
                                                x1    1

                                                     0.5

                                                      0
            x1                                             0                   500                       1000
                                                                               Time
                                  x2
                 x3
                                                      2

                                                     1.5
      (e)
                                                x1    1

                                                     0.5

                                                      0
            x1                                             0      500          1000         1500         2000
                                                                               Time
                                  x2




                 Figure 12.4 Period doublings in a three-species Lotka-Volterra system: phase space is
                 on the left and x1 is plotted on the right. (a) spiral fixed point, (b) simple periodic orbit,
                 (c) period-2 orbit, (d) period-4 orbit, (e) chaos
190   Producer-Consumer Dynamics




                    Figure 12.5    An individual-based three-species ecosystem


      allows one to model each member of a population separately. Hence, in this section
      we will consider more of an animal-eye view of the world.
          The ecosystem that we will model in this section will consist of a finite grid
      with a definite width and height and, therefore, will have (width × height) discrete
      points on it. As shown in Figure 12.5, every point must be empty or have a single
      plant or animal on it. In our ecosystem there are three types of creatures: plants,
      herbivores, and carnivores. Plants grow in empty spaces, herbivores eat plants and
      move through space, and carnivores eat herbivores and also move about. Since
      each creature consumes some sort of resource that is produced by something else
      (the plant “consumes” an empty space to grow), you may find it helpful to consult
      Figure 12.6, which illustrates the flow of resources in our ecosystem and lists the
      types of actions or interactions that are responsible for transfers of resources.
          Given a grid that has creatures and empty spaces, the system will evolve over
      time according to the update algorithm in Table 12.1. Notice that the algorithm is
      not completely deterministic; there are several places in which randomness is used.
      Besides using a random update order for the animals, we assume that the animals
      will make a random choice when presented with more than one option for an action.
      For instance, if a herbivore has three plants as near neighbors, the herbivore may
      move to any of the three plants. Similarly, a carnivore will take a step in a random
      direction if there are no herbivores in its vicinity. Hence, the individual-based model
      combines deterministic and random processes, much like the way things appear to
      work in the real world.
          Another form of complexity in the individual-based model is in the sheer size
      of its state space. Recall that the state of the three-species Lotka-Volterra system
      could be described by three real numbers. Since the system was chaotic, we would
191   Producer-Consumer Dynamics




         Empty Space
                                  Growth
                                                 ✲ Plant
                          ❳❳❳
                        ②
                        ❳❳   ❳❳
                      ✻ ❳❳❳❳ ❳❳❳❳  Birth
                               ❳❳❳ ❳❳❳
               Birth   Death      ❳❳❳ ❳❳❳            Consumption
                                         ❳❳   ❳❳
                     ❄             Death   ❳❳   ❳❳③
                                                  ❳ ❄
                                             ❳❳
                                                ❳❳
             Carnivore ✛                            Herbivore
                                                Consumption



         Figure 12.6    Flow of resources in the three-species individual-based ecosystem



       • For every time step:
           • For every empty cell, e:
                • If e has three or more neighbors that are plants, then e will become a
                  plant at the next time step (assuming it isn’t trampled by a herbivore or
                  carnivore).
           • For every herbivore, h (in random order):
                • Decrease energy reserves of h by a fixed amount.
                • If h has no more energy, then h dies and becomes an empty space.
                • Else, if there is a plant next to h, then h moves on top of the plant, eats
                  it, and gains the plant’s energy.
                     • If h has suﬃcient energy reserves, then it will spawn a baby
                       herbivore on the space that it just exited.
                • Else, h will move into a randomly selected empty space, if one exists, that
                  is next to h’s current location.
           • For every carnivore, c (in random order):
                • Decrease energy reserves of c by a fixed amount.
                • If c has no more energy, then c dies and becomes an empty space.
                • Else, if there is a herbivore next to c, then c moves on top of the
                  herbivore, eats it, and gains the herbivore’s energy.
                     • If c has suﬃcient energy reserves, then it will spawn a baby carnivore
                       on the space that it just exited.
                • Else, c will move into a randomly selected empty space that is next to c’s
                  current location. If there are no empty spaces, then c will move through
                  plants.



               Table 12.1       Update algorithm for individual-based ecological model
192   Producer-Consumer Dynamics



       The Beer Game                                                           Digression 12.1

        John Sterman, of MIT’s Sloan School of Management, has come up with a sort of
        “flight simulator” for business managers known as “The Beer Game.” A team of
        players in the game consists of a retailer, wholesaler, distributor, and brewer, all
        of whom must pass sales orders down the line in the order listed, with the retailer
        receiving orders from a consumer. During each round of play, each player must fill all
        current orders and place orders with his own supplier while attempting to minimize
        back orders and inventory. Players are penalized for any cases held in inventory and
        any back orders. The goal of a team is to minimize the collective penalties.

        In one scenario, Sterman fixed the customer’s orders to four cases of beer per week
        for the first four weeks. Starting at the fifth week, the customer orders eight cases per
        week, and continues with this amount for the rest of the game.

        One would think that the four players would be quickly able to coordinate their
        ordering habits and that they would rapidly settle down into regular buy-and-sell
        orders of eight cases each. Instead, order sizes fluctuate to a surprising degree. At
        one point in the game it is common to see players ordering forty cases of beer despite
        the fact that the consumer never orders more than eight cases. Nonlinearity due to
        delays in information flow, coupled with feedback, makes a “trivial” economic model
        nearly pathological. Real-world systems, with their added complexity, are therefore
        much more susceptible to chaotic dynamics.




      essentially need infinite precision to perfectly capture the state. But in practice,
      most people are still comfortable with the idea of simulating the Lotka-Volterra
      system on a computer with three floating-point numbers.2 Given the density of
      the real numbers (as discussed in Chapter 2), you may be more impressed with
      the volume (and density) of the Lotka-Volterra system’s state space, but the state
      space of the individual-based ecosystem is in some ways more impressive than that
      of the continuous system. Here is why. On my computer, three floating-point
      numbers require just less than 200 bits of storage, which means that the state of
      the three-species Lotka-Volterra system takes about 200 bits to approximate. The
      individual-based ecosystem requires 2 × width × height bits3 ; hence, a tiny 10 × 10
      ecosystem needs the same number of bits that the Lotka-Volterra system required
      for an approximation. If we increase the dimensions to something more realistic,
      say 100 × 100 or even 1000 × 1000, the memory requirements grow dramatically. In
      fact, the number of legal states for the individual-based ecosystem easily approaches
      astronomically obscene numbers, such as the number of electrons in the universe.
        2 That is, the computer’s fixed-precision approximation of a real number.
        3 We need two bits for each cell to encode the four possible states.
193                     Producer-Consumer Dynamics




                                                                                           Plants
                                                                                       Herbivores
                                                                                       Carnivores
                 High

  Population
               Medium


                 Low
                    3500                         4000                        4500                        5000
                                                               Time


                              Figure 12.7    Population levels for all creatures, normalized for comparison



                            In short, the Lotka-Volterra system uses three real numbers for its state, but it is
                        still confined to a three-dimensional space. The state space of the individual-based
                        ecosystem can easily require thousands of dimensions, especially when we also factor
                        more information into the simulation, such as the energy level of a creature or the
                        direction a creature is moving. Moreover, it would be fairly straightforward to turn
                        the discrete dynamics of the model into one consisting of continuous dynamics, so
                        that a creature’s position, health, and direction are all represented by real numbers
                        instead of discrete numbers. The point is that since the individual-based model
                        consists of many subunits, it is far more complicated than the simpler Lotka-Volterra
                        systems. All of this may make you wonder how “well-behaved” the individual-
                        based ecosystem will be when simulated. Will it seethe like a boiling pot of water,
                        rapidly changing states, with little correlation between successive states? Or will the
                        simulation fall into more mundane behavior that is more typical of trivial dynamical
                        systems that exhibit fixed-point behavior?
                            Figure 12.7 shows the populations of the three species over 1500 time steps for
                        a simulation on a 100 × 100 grid. The population levels have been normalized so
                        that they can be plotted on a single chart because, on an average basis, one would
                        expect the number of plants to be far greater than the number of herbivores, which,
                        in turn, is greater than the number of carnivores. What we see is that a peak in the
                        plant population is typically followed by a peak in the herbivore population, which
                        is then followed by a peak in the carnivore population. The carnivores eat up the
                        herbivores, making room for the plants to grow again, thus repeating the cycle.
                            A grid with dimensions of 100 × 100 is, perhaps, a bit unrealistic in that it is
                        very small in comparison with the size of natural ecosystems; but it is pleasing,
                        nonetheless, to see that the resulting cyclic behavior is not unlike the patterns
194   Producer-Consumer Dynamics



      found in the Lotka-Volterra system. In any event, the population values plotted
      in Figure 12.7 show some simulation artifacts, in that the herbivore and carnivore
      population levels have small random-like fluctuations most likely due to the small
      population sizes. If we were to increase the size of the grid even more, some of these
      jerky movements would be smoothed out.
          But if we were to increase the grid size by an enormous amount, eventually we
      would find that the statistics of the system would approach fixed-point behavior.
      Why? Think of the weather for a moment. Within a local vicinity we can compile
      statistics on the average temperature. If the local region is the size of, say, Philadel-
      phia, then the temperature will have several peaks during the summer, with large
      peaks corresponding to heat waves and little peaks corresponding to daily highs. If
      we increase the size even further to the size of the northern hemisphere, then the
      localized peaks from the heat waves and daily highs will average out some more,
      giving a smooth, sinusoidal appearance. Finally, if we make our “local” region the
      size of the entire planet, then the average temperature as a function of time will
      approach something close to a constant function because the seasons in the northern
      hemisphere are exactly the opposite of the seasons in the southern. Something like
      this also happens as one changes the size of a measured region in an individual-based
      ecosystem.
          For example, if we look at a single grid point, the population level for that single
      point will be either 0 or 1. The exact value depends on the random movements of
      creatures close to the point of interest. Hence, predicting the future of a single grid
      point is impossible because it breaks down to predicting the outcome of a coin toss.
      On the other extreme, if we simulate an ecosystem on a one-billion square grid,
      local fluctuations in diﬀerent regions will start to average out just the way local
      weather diﬀerences will average out on a global scale. So at the two extremes we
      have tiny ecosystems yielding randomness and enormous ecosystems yielding static
      behavior. Somewhere in between an enormous grid and a tiny one, population
      dynamics becomes more interesting.
          David Rand and his collaborators performed a series of numerical experiments
      that showed much the same, but in a far more rigorous manner. They, too, studied a
      three-species predator-prey ecosystem that was modeled as a system of individuals,
      but they also varied the size of the grid and came up with a technique for determining
      which sampling size would reveal interesting properties. To be clear, larger grid
      sizes always result in more realistic simulations; what Rand and company did was
      to vary the size of a subset of the grid in which they computed their statistics. After
      finding an interesting sample size, they proceeded to generate population data for a
      sampled window at the right size. With this data, they were able to construct a four-
      dimensional attractor that was capable of predicting the system’s behavior with 94
      percent accuracy. This means that the dynamics of the system essentially collapse
      onto a lower-dimensional space, meaning that some of the simpler predator-prey
      models, like the Lotka-Volterra system, may not be so far-fetched after all.
195                                        Producer-Consumer Dynamics



                                        6000
                                        5000



      Plant Population
                                        4000
                                        3000
                                        2000
                                        1000
                                          0
                                               0            1000            2000            3000            4000             5000
                                                                                    Time



                                         200




                 Herbivore Population
                                         150

                                         100

                                          50

                                           0
                                               0            1000            2000            3000             4000            5000
                                                                                    Time



                                         150




                 Carnivore Population
                                         100


                                          50


                                           0
                                               0            1000            2000            3000             4000            5000
                                                                                    Time


                                                   Figure 12.8   Population levels for the individual-based predator-prey system
196                                    Producer-Consumer Dynamics




      Carnivore Population                                                                                                                           Carnivore Population




      Plant Population                                                                                                       Plant Population
                                                                                       Herbivore Population                                                                                     Herbivore Population




                                       Figure 12.9 A dual-image stereogram of the attractor of the individual-based predator-
                                       prey system: To view, stare at the center of the two images and cross your eyes until the
                                       two images merge. Allow your eyes to relax so that they can refocus.

                                                                                       140


                                                                                       120


                                                                                       100




                                                               Herbivore Population
                                                                                        80


                                                                                        60


                                                                                        40


                                                                                        20


                                                                                         0
                                                                                             0      1000      2000          3000                               4000   5000    6000
                                                                                                                      Plant Population

                              90                                                                                                                      90

                              80                                                                                                                      80

                              70                                                                                                                      70

                              60                                                                                                                      60




       Carnivore Population                                                                                                   Carnivore Population
                              50                                                                                                                      50

                              40                                                                                                                      40

                              30                                                                                                                      30

                              20                                                                                                                      20

                              10                                                                                                                      10

                               0                                                                                                                       0
                                   0    1000   2000         3000                             4000    5000      6000                                        0                 50                          100           150
                                                      Plant Population                                                                                                            Herbivore Population




                                       Figure 12.10                                   Population phase portraits for the individual-based predator-prey system
197         Producer-Consumer Dynamics



                Figure 12.8 shows the population levels of the three species over 5000 time steps,
            while Figures 12.9 and 12.10 show the same data plotted in a three-dimensional
            space. While the data don’t perfectly collapse into a three-dimensional space, there
            is still a great deal of structure in the images. The state-space plots are neither
            random (i.e., a scattered mess) nor simple (i.e., a single point). Instead, there is
            structure with some order mixed with disorder.


12.5 Unifying Themes
            In any situation in which many simple units interact in a love-hate, give-take, or
            cooperate-compete manner, it is possible that diﬀerential equations like those found
            in the generalized Lotka-Volterra system can account for many of the underlying dy-
            namical properties. We have, here, a clear case in which radically diﬀerent phenom-
            ena can be described with similar mathematical tools precisely because producer-
            consumer-type interactions are so common even in diﬀerent areas such as chemistry,
            biology, and the social sciences.
                We have also seen how chaos is not randomness but is, in fact, order masquerad-
            ing as disorder. Pathologically complex systems, consisting of thousands or even
            trillions of units, can often collapse into patterns that are describable by a mere
            handful of equations. The interesting thing is that there appears to be a tendency
            for systems of all sizes to approach chaos from two diﬀerent directions, in the form
            of small and simple systems that produce surprisingly complex motion, and enor-
            mously complex systems with dynamics that ultimately break down into something
            simpler.
                Parallel to this last point, there is an ironic twist to be found in the compari-
            son of how the complexity of rules and motions changes when viewed on diﬀerent
            scales. Individuals can be described by simple rules. Table 12.1 is an example of
            an algorithm that completely describes how every individual in an ecosystem is to
            behave from one time step to another. Nevertheless, we are helpless to predict the
            motion of a species or an ecosystem in the long run because the composite motion is
            far more complex then the individual motions. This is even the case in completely
            deterministic systems and is not due solely to the partial randomness in the algo-
            rithm from Table 12.1. So it would appear that this is a case of the composition
            being more complex than the totality of the components.
                But if we look at the statistics of our individual-based ecosystem, things seem
            to get more complex as we narrow our view. On a very large scale, famine in one
            region is balanced by a growth spurt in another, yielding near constant statistics
            over very large spatial scales. Complementary to this, if we look at a single point on
            a grid, its statistics are far more complex precisely because we are ignoring the rest
            of the world. So it is possible—depending on your viewpoint—for the components
            to be more complicated than the composition.
198          Producer-Consumer Dynamics



                      Option Name         Option Type        Option Meaning
                      -seed               integer            seed for random parameters
                      -points             integer            number of points to produce
                      -f0                 double             initial fish population
                      -s0                 double             initial shark population
                      -a                  double             fish growth rate
                      -b                  double             shark consumption rate
                      -c                  double             fish nutritional value
                      -d                  double             shark death rate
                      -dt                 double             time step increment


                                  Table 12.2    Command-line options for lotka


                 In the end, viewing things from either the microscopic or the macroscopic view-
             point fails to capture what it is about these systems that is most interesting. For at
             the intermediate scales we find that the order and disorder—or perhaps the com-
             putability and incomputability—balance out to produce a pattern of behavior that
             is far more interesting than either of the extremes.


12.6 Further Exploration
             All of the plots in this chapter where made with lotka, predprey, or gsw. The first
             program, lotka, numerically integrates the two-species Lotka-Volterra system with
             a second-order Euler’s method. The program is very simple and its command-line
             options, listed in Table 12.2, work exactly as explained in Section 12.2. Since this
             program will only produce data as output (and no graphics), it is primarily useful
             as an example of how to numerically integrate ordinary diﬀerential equations. You
             may wish to use the source code of lotka as a template for writing similar programs
             that use other diﬀerential equations.
                 The time-series and state-space plots of the generalized Lotka-Volterra system
             were produced from data generated with predprey. The options for the program
             are summarized in Table 12.3, and most their usages should be clear from the
             description in the table and from the text in this chapter. The system parameter,
             α, is set with the -alpha option. Similar to some of the programs from Chapter 11,
             the specifics of predprey’s graphical output can be controlled with the -xp, -yp, and
             -delta options. The -xp and -yp options determine what time varying variables
             are used as the x- and y-coordinates of the plots and must take a value that is from
             one of the strings: x(t), y(t), z(t), x(t-delta), y(t-delta), or z(t-delta).4
               4 On UNIX systems, you may need to enclose the strings in double quotes to prevent your

             command shell from interpreting the parentheses as special characters.
199   Producer-Consumer Dynamics



           Option Name        Option Type       Option Meaning
           -width             integer           width of the plot in pixels
           -height            integer           height of the plot in pixels
           -skip              integer           number of initial points to skip
           -points            integer           number of points to plot
           -alpha             double            value of the alpha parameter
           -delta             integer           time delay term
           -dt                double            time step
           -x0                double            initial X value
           -y0                double            initial Y value
           -z0                double            initial Z value
           -data              switch            don’t plot but print points
           -xp                string            x-coordinate for plot
           -yp                string            y-coordinate for plot
           -factor            double            auto-scale expansion factor
           -inv               switch            invert all colors?
           -xmag              integer           magnification factor for X Windows
           -term              string            how to plot points


                        Table 12.3    Command-line options for predprey


      For example, the command:

           predprey -xp "x(t)" -yp "z(t)"

      will plot the state space of x(t) versus z(t), and the command:

           predprey -xp "y(t)" -yp "y(t-delta)"

      will plot y(t) versus y(t − ∆), a delayed coordinate embedding for the system, with
      ∆ being determined by the -delta option. Thus, the program will plot any state
      variable against any other variable or any delayed state variable.
          Table 12.4 summarizes the options for gsw (which is short for grass, sheep, wolf),
      the program used to produce the data for the individual-based models. Although
      it was not demonstrated in this chapter, gsw can also produce plots that represent
      each creature by a single colored point. A single plot for a single time step is not
      very informative (which is why I didn’t include any in this chapter), but viewing
      them in succession, you can witness the rise and fall of each of the species much
      like a movie. The -width and -height options are used to specify the spatial size
      of your ecosystem and, hence, the size of your plot.
          Together, the -plants, -herbs, and -carns options determine the initial pop-
      ulation sizes of the species. A new plant will grow in an empty space only if the
200   Producer-Consumer Dynamics



              Option Name        Option Type        Option Meaning
              -width             integer            width of the plot in pixels
              -height            integer            height of the plot in pixels
              -steps             integer            number of simulated steps
              -seed              integer            random seed for initial state
              -plants            integer            initial number of plants
              -herbs             integer            initial number of herbivores
              -carns             integer            initial number of carnivores
              -pmin              integer            min. plants to grow new plant
              -pmax              integer            max. plants to grow new plant
              -Ep                integer            energy of plant
              -Eh                integer            energy of herbivore
              -Ec                integer            energy of carnivore
              -Ch                integer            step energy cost for herbivores
              -Cc                integer            step energy cost for carnivores
              -Pt                integer            number of steps to grow plant
              -samp              integer            size of subsample statistaics
              -stats             switch             show statistics?
              -pfreq             integer            plot frequency
              -noext             switch             prevent extinction?
              -inv               switch             invert colors?
              -xmag              integer            magnification for X Windows
              -term              string             how to plot points


                           Table 12.4    Command-line options for gsw


      space has a number of plant neighbors that is inclusively between the values speci-
      fied by -pmin and -pmax. The -Ep, -Eh, -Ec, -Ch, and -Cc options determine how
      much energy animals gain and lose each time step and each time they eat another
      creature. And with -Pt you can make it so that plants need many steps in order to
      regrow.
          For the collected statistics, the population of each species is printed out at each
      time step. With the -samp option you can change the behavior of the program so
      that instead of printing out the total population, it will only count creatures within
      the square defined by the upper-left corner of the grid and the point located at n
      points down and to the right from the upper-left corner, where n is the value given
      with the -samp option.
          If you want to cheat and make it impossible for the animals to die out com-
      pletely, make sure that the -noext switch is set. All other options should be self-
      explanatory.
201         Producer-Consumer Dynamics



12.7 Further Reading
             Capra, F. (1996). The web of life: A new scientific understanding of living systems.
             New York: Doubleday.
             Casti, J. L. (1994). Complexification: Explaining a paradoxical world through the
             science of surprise. New York: HarperCollins.
             Dewdney, A. K. (1984). Computer Recreations: Sharks and fish wage an ecological
             war on the toroidal planet wa-tor. Sci. Am., 251(6): 14–22.
             Kuang, Y. (1993). Delay diﬀerential equations with applications in population
             dynamics. New York: Academic Press.
             Rand, D. A. & Wilson, H. (1995). Using spatio-temporal chaos and intermediate-
             scale determinism to quantify spatially-extended ecosystems. Proc. R. Soc. Lond.
             B, 259(1355): 111–117.
             Sterman, J. D. (1984). Instructions for running the beer distribution game. Tech-
             nical Report D-3679, System Dynamics Group, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
             Tu, P. N. V. (1992). Dynamical systems: An introduction with applications in
             economics and biology. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
13   Controlling Chaos




      It turns out that an eerie type of chaos can lurk just behind a facade of order—and yet,
                                       deep inside the chaos lurks an even eerier type of order.
                                                                         — Douglas Hofstadter


         Amid the turmoil and tumult of battle, there may be seeming disorder and yet no real
                                                                              disorder at all.
                                                                                 — Sun Tzu


                  All stable processes we shall predict. All unstable processes we shall control.
                                                                         — John von Neumann




     In this chapter, we will put together several key points from the last three
     chapters to show how chaotic dynamical systems can be more easily controlled
     than nonchaotic systems of comparable complexity. The basic technique, due to
     Edward Ott, Celso Grebogi, and James Yorke, turns out to be relatively simple to
     implement. However, the formal derivation of the technique can be a bit diﬃcult
     to comprehend. Nevertheless, one goal of this chapter is to present the material in
     bite-sized, easily digestible parts.
         The implications for the existence of a method to control chaos are extremely
     exciting. Some possible applications include smart pacemakers, epileptic seizure
     inhibitors, intelligent control strategies for adjusting the global economy, and (who
     knows?) even weather control. It may be decades (if at all) until the last two
     examples are realized, simply because they involve global systems that are extremely
     complex. On the other hand, the first two examples are currently the subject of
     much research, and products for such devices are either already available or will be
     in the near future.
         Throughout this chapter, please keep in mind the following aspects of how
     chaotic systems work. Each item listed below makes the control problem a lit-
     tle bit easier than it would normally be. Taken together, all of these issues make
     controlling chaos a more tractable problem.
204          Controlling Chaos



                • Bang for the buck. Since chaotic systems are extremely sensitive, a very small
                  perturbation can cause a large diﬀerence in a system’s future behavior. Thus,
                  with only minute adjustments to a system, we can trick a chaotic system into
                  more desirable behavior.
                • Preselected goals. Typically, one would like to see a chaotic system converted
                  into either fixed-point or limit-cycle behavior. Since every chaotic attractor
                  has an infinite number of limit cycles embedded within it, a choice for the
                  desired behavior may already be identified for us.
                • What goes around comes around. Since we have a preselected goal for the
                  desired system behavior, and since we wish to use only small perturbations,
                  how can we be sure that the chaotic system will get close to the desired
                  behavior? The answer lies in the ergodic nature of chaotic systems. Ergodicity
                  means that with a finite amount of patience, we can get as close to the goal
                  behavior as we want, if we just wait long enough.
                Over the next few pages, we will examine four “bite-sized chunks” that are
             needed to explain the derivation of this strategy to control chaos. In order of
             presentation, we will look at Taylor expansions, vector calculus, vector inner and
             outer products, and eigensystems.


13.1 Taylor Expansions
             Suppose you want to approximate a complicated function by a simpler function,
             and furthermore that you care if your approximation is accurate only within a
             small portion of the complicated function’s range. In other words, if f (x) is the
             complicated function, and a is the point at which we want our approximation to
             be accurate, then we couldn’t care less how accurate the approximation is for x far
             from a. With these ground rules in place, a good approximation can be found in a
             Taylor expansion. The first-order Taylor expansion of f (x) is written as:

                                          fˆ(x) = f (a) + (x − a)f ′ (a).

             Let’s examine each term in detail. The little “hat” above the function name, that
             is, fˆ(x), means that we are attempting an approximation of f (x). Next, we have
             the term f (a), which is just the value of the complicated function at the point, a.
             The (x − a) term gives us an idea of how far x is from a, and also whether x is to
             the left or right of a. Finally, f ′ (a) is the first derivative or slope of f (x) at a.
                 Putting everything together, here is how a Taylor expansion works. If x happens
             to be equal to a, then fˆ(x) will be equal to f (x); thus, for this one example, the
             approximation is perfect. Suppose, instead, that x is a little to the right of a and,
             therefore, just a bit larger than a. In this case, (x−a) will be a small positive number
             that, when multiplied by the slope of the function, f ′ (a), tells us approximately how
205          Controlling Chaos


                        2.5




                          2




                        1.5




                 f(x)     1




                        0.5




                          0




                        -0.5
                            -1.5      -1          -0.5         0           0.5          1           1.5
                                                               x




             Figure 13.1 An example of a Taylor expansion: The function, f (x) = −2x2 + 2, is
             plotted alongside the Taylor expansion constructed at the point x = 21 , fˆ(x) = 52 + 2x.


             far f (x) is from f (a). If x is just smaller than a, then (x−a) will be a small negative
             number. The Taylor expansion works similarly for the case of x being a little bit to
             the left of a. Figure 13.1 contains an example Taylor expansion illustrating these
             facts much better.
                 In a nutshell, the Taylor expansion of a function is accurate only near the point
             it was constructed about, because the Taylor expansion is a simple linear1 function
             drawn such that it passes through the point (a, f (a)) and has the same slope as
             f (a).


13.2 Vector Calculus
             What most people think of as a function is usually more properly referred to as a
             scalar function, where the scalar portion of the name indicates that the function
             takes a single scalar argument and returns a single scalar result. For many ap-
                1 You can also construct more complicated Taylor expansions that include polynomial terms

             that are multiplied by the higher derivatives of f (x). However, for our needs, the first-order
             Taylor expansion is suﬃcient.
206   Controlling Chaos




      Figure 13.2 A vector function represented by a surface: Taking a slice parallel to one
      axis through the surface reveals a one-dimensional function.


      plications, scalar functions aren’t quite good enough because the application may
      require functions that take many arguments and return many results.
          Since the Hénon map is a function of two arguments and returns two results, it
      maps nicely into this notation. Just to make things clear, let’s agree to write the
      “next state” function of the Hénon map as
                                                   a − x2t + byt
                                                 (               )
                                  f (xt , yt ) =                   .
                                                        xt

      We boldface f (xt , yt ) to denote the fact that f returns a vector result. We also could
      have written the function with a single boldface argument, that is, f (x), to indicate
      that the argument is a vector as well. However, having a boldface x could lead
      to some confusion, since the x term is quite a diﬀerent animal than xt . Anyway,
      vector functions are really equivalent to listing multiple scalar functions (as we did
      in the last chapter), but it is important to recognize the distinction that a vector
      function explicitly groups the equations together so as to state “these things belong
      with each other.”
          Putting all of this together, what do you think the derivative of a vector function
      looks like? We know that the derivative of a scalar function tells us about the
      slope of the function. Well, the derivative of a vector function reveals the same
      information, but in a slightly more complicated manner. Breaking up the Hénon
      map into two scalar equations that take two arguments, it would be possible to plot
      the function responses as a surface where the x- and y-coordinates specify values of
      xt and yt , and the height of the plot, the z-coordinate, is the function result (i.e.,
      xt+1 or yt+1 ).
          Here comes the tricky part. Imagine that our three-dimensional plot looks some-
      thing like a hill (it really doesn’t matter what form we imagine it to take, as long
      that we agree that it is three-dimensional), as shown in Figure 13.2. With the x-
207          Controlling Chaos



             axis running left-to-right, and the y-axis running forward-and-backward, suppose
             an earthmover is used to cut a long slice across the hill such that the slice is parallel
             to the x-axis and at a right angle to the y-axis. The newly created edge of the
             slice is just like a scalar function that was constructed from the vector function by
             holding the y argument constant and letting x vary. We can now define a partial
             derivative as a special function that tells us about the slope of one of the function
             arguments, but is possibly parameterized in the other function argument.
                 In the case of the Hénon map, there is a total of four partial derivatives that
             we can compute because there are two arguments and two results. To compute
             a partial derivative of a result with respect to one of the arguments (say xt ), we
             pretend that all of the other arguments (in this case yt ) are simply constants. In
             this way, we can now go on to compute the four partial derivatives of the Hénon
             map as:
                                 ∂xt+1           ∂xt+1       ∂yt+1      ∂yt+1
                                        = −2xt ,        = b,       = 1,       = 0.
                                  ∂xt             ∂yt         ∂xt        ∂yt
             The little curly character, ∂, should be read as a d but specifically indicates that
             the derivatives are partial derivatives. The partial derivatives of a system reveal
             exactly how the state space variables evolve relative to each other. For example,
             since ∂yt+1 /∂xt = 1 and ∂yt+1 /∂yt = 0, we can determine that the value of yt+1
             closely depends on the value of xt but is completely independent of yt .
                The four partial derivatives above can obviously be written as a single (2 × 2)
             matrix. This is a special matrix known as a Jacobian matrix . The Jacobian matrix
             of a vector function tells us how each result of the vector function slopes relative
             to varying each argument. Since we have extended the definition of a derivative for
             vector functions, we can construct a Taylor expansion for vector functions as well.


13.3 Inner and Outer Vector Product
             Given a pair of vectors, it is often useful to have some sort of measure to indicate
             how similar or dissimilar the vectors are. The inner product (or dot product) of two
             vectors is one such measure that happens to have a nice geometric interpretation.
             As a specific example, consider the two vectors, x and y. The inner product of the
             two (n × 1) column vectors can be written in many ways:
                                                  n
                                                  !
                                 xT y = x · y =         xi yi = x1 y1 + · · · + xn yn .
                                                  i=1

             The first written form of the inner product indicates that the inner product can
             be computed by performing matrix multiplication on a (1 × n) row vector and an
             (n × 1) column vector. In this chapter, I will mostly use the first form, xT y, for
             reasons that will be explained at the end of this section.
208   Controlling Chaos



                                               .. .
                                                   x
                                               . ......
                                               . .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                                       ||x||   .
                                               .                                                                 y     .
                                               .
                                               .                                                               .........
                                               .                                                             ..... ..
                                               .                                                          .... ...
                                               .
                                               . .............                                        ..
                                                                                                       ....            .
                                               .              ........                             .... ...
                                               .                      ......                     ...
                                               .                           ...                ....        ..
                                               .
                                               .                 θ            ...
                                                                                 ... .....
                                                                                           ...         ..
                                               .                                        .
                                                                                   ......         ...
                                               .                                   .
                                               .                               ...
                                                                                   .         ..
                                               .                           ....           ..
                                               .                       .... ...
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .             .....
                                                                   ....
                                                                                .  .         ||y||
                                               .            .                 .
                                               .         ....            ..
                                               . ......             ..
                                               .. .
                                                        .. ...
                                                          .




      Figure 13.3 The inner product of two vectors as a function of their lengths and the
      angle between them


         As for the geometric interpretation, let ||x|| and ||y|| denote the length of x and
      y, respectively. Also, let the angle between the two vectors be denoted by θ, as
      shown in Figure 13.3. We can now express the inner product as
                                      xT y = ||x||||y|| cos θ.
      Here comes the neat part. By doing a little bit of algebraic manipulation, we can
      rewrite the last equation as
                                     xT y
                                                = cos θ.
                                    ||x|| ||y||
      Why is this neat? The normalized vector x/||x|| is a vector that has the same
      direction as x, but has length of exactly 1 (assuming that ||x|| is not 0). We can
      say the same thing about the relationship between y/||y|| and y as well. Therefore,
      the inner product of two unit-length vectors is exactly equal to the cosine of the
      angle between them. Thus, if the two unit vectors are parallel (i.e., θ is 0), then
      the inner product of the two vectors is equal to 1. Likewise, if the two vectors are
      orthogonal (i.e., θ is 90 degrees), then the inner product of the two vectors will be
      0.
         Since an inner product converts two vectors into a scalar, is there some way to
      transform two vectors into a matrix? The outer product is complementary to the
      inner product in that it does exactly that. Like the inner product, the outer product
      can be written in many ways:
                                              ⎡                    ⎤
                                                 x1 y1 · · · x1 yn
                              xyT = x × y = ⎣ ...              .. ⎥ .
                                              ⎢
                                                                . ⎦
                                                                xn y1                        · · · xn yn
209           Controlling Chaos



              The outer product also has a geometric interpretation, but it is nontrivial to visu-
              alize.
                  A good reason to write the inner and outer products as xT y and xyT is that if you
              have to mix multiple operations together, the rules for manipulating the expressions
              are more explicit. By way of example, if we were to perform an outer product (to
              get a matrix) and we wanted to multiply the result by a third vector, (xyT )y, we
              could reorder the operations as x(yT y), thus simplifying the computation.


13.4 Eigenvectors, Eigenvalues, and Basis
              The final advanced topic that we will review involves what are known as eigen-
              vectors and eigenvalues. Imagine a scalar function, f (x), plotted in some manner.
              Furthermore, suppose that the identity function, y = x, is plotted on the same sur-
              face as the original function. For all points, x, where the identity function intersects
              the first function, we have the property that f (x) = x. A similar property exists
              for vector functions as well.
                  Let A represent an (n × n) matrix and x represent an (n × 1) column vector.
              Matrix-vector multiplication of A times x is computed as
                                               ⎡                          ⎤
                                                  A11 x1 + · · · + A1n xn
                                        Ax = ⎣               ..
                                                                          ⎦.
                                               ⎢                          ⎥
                                                              .
                                                 An1 x1 + · · · + Ann xn

              Notice that multiplying A times x results in another (n × 1) column vector; thus,
              one way to think of an (n × n) matrix is as a function that maps vectors to vectors.
              It so happens that for some matrices there can exist as many as n unique special
              vectors, e1 , . . ., en , that have the property Aei = λi ei . The term ei denotes
              the ith eigenvector of A, and λi denotes the ith eigenvalue of A. In many ways,
              eigenvectors are a lot like the points of a scalar function that map to themselves.
              By convention, eigenvectors are understood to have unit length, which means that
              the inner product and length of the vector equal 1.
                  A good example of how to visualize what an eigenvector looks like comes from
              Gilbert Strang, author of Linear Algebra and Its Applications. Imagine the rotation
              of Earth. Using the techniques of Chapter 7, we could describe the rotation in terms
              of a (3 × 3) matrix that maps surface coordinates to their future location. The poles
              of Earth are eigenvectors because their direction is always unchanged under Earth’s
              rotation. Furthermore, the eigenvalues of the poles are equal to 1 because the length
              stays the same.
                  If an eigenvector has an associated eigenvalue that is less than 1, then all vectors
              that lie in the same direction as this eigenvector will shrink when multiplied to the
              matrix. Similarly, for eigenvalues greater than 1, a matrix will expand a vector
              through multiplication. In this way, eigenvectors and eigenvalues can be seen as
210   Controlling Chaos



      descriptions of how a matrix will expand and contract vectors when the vectors
      are multiplied by it. This observation really gets to the heart of our earlier ob-
      servation that all chaotic systems stretch and fold state spaces. By understanding
      eigenvectors, we can understand how chaos works a little better.
          Eigenvectors also have a very useful property that we are going to exploit in the
      next section. In a nutshell, eigenvectors form a basis in an n-dimensional space,
      which means that for any n-dimensional vector, x, it is possible to rewrite x as a
      linear combination of the n n-dimensional eigenvectors:

                                      x = a1 e i + · · · + an e n ,

      for some choice of a1 through an . As an example, the simplest basis of a three-
      dimensional space consists of the unit vectors, which can be combined as
                            ⎡   ⎤       ⎡    ⎤      ⎡    ⎤ ⎡       ⎤
                              1           0            0        a1
                         a1 ⎣ 0 ⎦ + a2 ⎣ 1 ⎦ + a3 ⎣ 0 ⎦ = ⎣ a2 ⎦ ,
                              0           0            1        a3

      to form any three-dimensional vector. In any event, let’s assume that for an (n × n)
      matrix, A, you found n unique eigenvectors, e1 , . . . , en . If you were to rewrite an
      (n × 1) column vector, x, as a linear combination of the eigenvectors, performing
      the operation Ax becomes much simpler:

                                Ax    = A(a1 ei + · · · + an en )
                                      = a1 Ae1 + · · · + an Aen
                                      = a1 λ1 e1 + · · · + an λn en .

      Thus, instead of having to perform the matrix-vector multiplication the “hard” way,
      we can transform the operation into one that requires only scalar multiplication and
      vector addition.
          Related to this property, for every set of vectors that forms a basis in an n-
      dimensional space, there exist n more vectors, g1 , . . ., gn , that have the two prop-
      erties that for all i, the inner product giT ei = 1, and for all i ̸= j, giT ej = 0. This
      new set of vectors is said to be a contravariant basis. For the example of [1 0 0]T ,
      [0 1 0]T , and [0 0 1]T , the same three vectors form their own contravariant basis, but
      for a more complicated set of vectors the contravariant basis will almost surely be
      diﬀerent from the original basis. With a set of eigenvectors and a contravariant
      basis, it is possible to rewrite the original matrix in terms of the two sets of vectors.
      To demonstrate that this is possible, we will once again perform an example matrix-
      vector multiplication, but this time we will rewrite A in terms of the contravariant
      basis and the eigenvectors, to get the same result as before. First, let’s rewrite x:

                                   Ax = A(a1 e1 + · · · + an en ).
211                  Controlling Chaos



        Term           Meaning
          xt           the state at time t
          pt           the control parameter, equal to kT (xt − xF )
          k            the control vector
      f (xt , pt )     the chaotic dynamical system
          A            the derivative (Jacobian matrix) of f (xt , pt ) with respect to xt
          b            the partial derivative of f (xt , pt ) with respect to pt
        es , eu        the stable and unstable eigenvectors of A
        λs , λu        the stable and unstable eigenvalues of A with λs < 1 < λu
        gs , gu        contravariant basis vectors with gsT es = guT eu = 1 and gsT eu = guT es = 0


                                    Table 13.1     A lexicon of the terms used in Section 13.5


                     Now we need to rewrite A:

                                     Ax = (λ1 e1 g1T + · · · + λn en gnT )(a1 e1 + · · · + an en ).

                     Since giT ej = 0 and giT ei = 1, for i ̸= j, most of the cross terms can be discarded
                     to get the familiar expression

                                                  Ax = a1 λ1 e1 + · · · + an λn en ,

                     which is the same result that we calculated earlier. The notion of an eigensystem
                     may seem a bit complicated; however, through the use of eigenvectors and eigenval-
                     ues, many mathematical problems that are extremely diﬃcult can be transformed
                     into a simpler version by taking advantage of the properties listed in this section.


13.5 OGY Control
                     We are now finally ready to discuss the control strategy introduced by Ott, Grebogi,
                     and Yorke. We will derive the OGY control law for a generic two-dimensional chaotic
                     system. The derivation may seem complicated; however, other than the four topics
                     that we discussed in the earlier sections, the only math that we need to derive the
                     control law is algebra. Nevertheless, you should consult Table 13.1 when needed,
                     which lists the mathematical terms used throughout this section.
                        Let the chaotic system that we want to control be described by xt+1 = f (xt , pt ),
                     where xt is the current state, xt+1 is the next state, and pt is a scalar control
                     parameter, sort of like a knob, that we can set to any value we want within a small
                     range. Since this is a two-dimensional system, all of the vector terms are (2 × 1)
                     column vectors. The system, f , may be an iterated map, or it may represent a
                     delayed coordinate embedding. We don’t care which, since in many ways discrete
                     maps and delayed coordinate embeddings of continuous systems are equivalent.
212   Controlling Chaos



       Controlling Cardiac Chaos                                                  Digression 13.1

        One of the more exciting areas in which chaos theory is being used is in the control
        of cardiac chaos. In 1992 Alan Garfinkel, Mark Spano, William Ditto, and James
        Weiss (GSDW) performed a remarkable experiment with a piece of rabbit ventricle.
        GSDW first placed the heart tissue in a solution with a small amount of drug capable
        of inducing arrhythmia in the heart tissue. Initially the heart tissue beat at a regular
        interval; however, in short order the tissue began to beat in a period-2 pattern, then
        a period-4, and eventually it fell into a totally aperiodic pattern.

        If the heart tissue was behaving normally, then the interbeat interval would be ap-
        proximately constant. GSDW decided to look at a state-space plot of the interval at
        time t versus time t + 1. Through numerical calculations, they were able to determine
        that the viewed state space had both a stable direction and an unstable direction.

        The control strategy used by GSDW was the following modified version of the OGY
        control law. Given an interbeat interval, It , attempt to select the next interbeat
        interval, It+1 , such that the pair (It , It+1 ) is as close to the stable location of the state
        space as possible. Then, with a small electrical pulse, induce a premature beat to
        correspond with the interval It+1 . Notice that this control strategy is unidirectional,
        in that a premature beat can be induced but it is not possible to prolong a beat. In
        any event, GSDW were able to coerce the heart tissue back into periodic behavior,
        with only small control forces.




         By definition, f (xt , pt ) must have at least one fixed point embedded within its
      chaotic attractor, which we will denote by xF . Let’s agree that our real goal is
      to tune pt so as to force the chaotic system into xF . What we really need is a
      simplified model of the dynamics of f (xt , pt ) when xt is near xF . Therefore, we
      need to compute the Taylor expansion of f (xt , pt ) about the point xF :
                               xt+1    ≈    f (xF , 0) + A(xt − xF ) + bpt
                                       ≈    xF + A(xt − xF ) + bpt .
      Here, A is the Jacobian matrix of f and b is the partial derivative of f with respect
      to pt , both evaluated at the fixed point. Let’s now assume that we want pt to be a
      linear function of (xt − xF ), that is, pt = kT (xt − xF ); thus, k defines the control
      law that we will use. It is now helpful to rewrite the Taylor expansion above as
                               xt+1    ≈ xF + A(xt − xF ) + bkT (xt − xF )
                        xt+1 − xF      ≈ (A + bkT )(xt − xF ).
        This may look like a mess, but the problem of choosing a good k can now be
      more easily discussed. Looking at the equation above, our real goal is to make
213      Controlling Chaos




  xt+1               xF                            xt+1                          xF


                                                                                           pt




                   xt                                                      xt

                   (a)                                                     (b)


         Figure 13.4 An embedded unstable fixed point: (a) the stable and unstable eigenvectors
         shown simultaneously attracting and repelling state trajectories (b) at time t, we influence
         xt+1 with a choice of pt that moves the point defined by (xt , xt+1 ) closer to the stable
         path



         (xt+1 − xF ) as small a vector as possible, since we want the next state, xt+1 , to
         be equal to the fixed point, xF . Let’s rewrite the last equation yet another time
         by making the substitutions C = A + bkT and dt = xt − xF , to get dt+1 = Cdt .
         Since our goal is for dt+1 to be as small as possible, suppose that dt is equal to one
         of the eigenvectors of C, thus giving λi ei = Cei . If the eigenvalue, λi , is smaller
         than 1, then iterating dt+1 = Cdt will force dt+1 to go to 0. If λi is greater than
         1, then iterating dt+1 = Cdt will force the system to explode in size.
            We are now ready to reveal the secret to OGY’s control technique: For all chaotic
         systems, and for any embedded fixed point, the Jacobian matrix evaluated at a fixed
         point, A, must have at least one eigenvalue greater than 1 and one eigenvalue less
         than 1. Why? The unstable fixed point can be likened to Figure 13.4a, which
         shows two hypothetical eigenvectors, one leading toward the fixed point and the
         other leading away. Let’s imagine that instead of having one direction that is
         repelling and the other that is attracting, both are attracting. If this were the case,
         then the fixed point would, in fact, be stable and attracting and this would not be
         a chaotic attractor, but a simple fixed point attractor. Similarly, if the fixed point
         were repelling in every direction, then the fixed point would not be embedded within
214   Controlling Chaos



      the chaotic attractor. Also note that this is related to the discussion in Chapter 10
      on how chaotic dynamical systems stretch and fold a system’s state space.
         We will now see how this fact can be mathematically exploited. Recall that
      any vector can be rewritten as a linear combination of a set of eigenvectors. Since
      we have already agreed that xt is a (2 × 1) column vector, let’s refer to the two
      eigenvectors of the Jacobian, A, as es and eu , with the first being the eigenvector
      with the eigenvalue less than 1 (the stable eigenvector) and the second being the
      eigenvector with the eigenvalue that is larger than 1 (the unstable eigenvector).
         When pt equals 0, the system f (xt , pt ) is identical to the uncontrolled dynamical
      system. Therefore, let’s temporarily drop the subexpression bkT (xt − xF ) from the
      Taylor expansion, to get the iteration xt+1 − xF ≈ A(xt − xF ). Finally, we need
      to rewrite the vector (xt − xF ) as a linear combination of the two eigenvectors:
      (xt − xF ) = (as es + au eu ). Putting all of this together, the iterates can now be
      expressed as
                               (xt+1 − xF )   = A(xt − xF )
                                              = A(as es + au eu )
                                              = as λs es + au λu eu ,
      with the λ terms being the stable and unstable eigenvalues. What does all of this
      mean? Suppose that we could magically make au λu eu go away. In this case, the
      iterates will tend toward 0 because λs is less than 1; thus, an eﬀective control
      strategy could consist entirely of doing our best to make (xt − xF ) as similar to es
      and as dissimilar to eu as possible.
          To do this, we have to pull one more mathematical trick so as to define exactly
      what we mean by “similar” and “dissimilar.” Let gs and gu form a contravariant
      basis of es and eu such that gsT es = guT eu = 1 and gsT eu = guT es = 0. If (xt − xF )
      is dissimilar to eu , then guT (xt − xF ) will be close to 0. Therefore, our goal will be
      to choose k such that the next iterate is closer to es than it was before.
          To compute a good choice for k, we need to go back to the equation
                               xt+1 − xF ≈ (A + bkT )(xt − xF ).
      Let’s now specify that we want guT (xt+1 − xF ) to be equal to 0 (making the next
      iterate dissimilar to eu ), which gives us
                                   guT (A + bkT )(xt − xF ) = 0.
      Rewriting the Jacobian as A = λs es gsT + λu eu guT and combining this with the last
      equation allows us to simplify the expression as follows:
                              guT (A + bkT )(xt − xF )   = 0
                                                         ..
                                                          .
                                                                λu gu
                                                     k   = −          .
                                                                guT b
215          Controlling Chaos



             Therefore, by using this choice of k, we could, in theory, coerce a two-dimensional
             chaotic system into its fixed point. Figure 13.4b shows how this choice of k will force
             the state of the chaotic system on to the path defined by the stable eigenvector,
             thus coercing the system into a state that is more likely to naturally fall into the
             fixed point on the next time step. In the next section, we will turn theory into
             practice by using this last equation to control the Hénon map.


13.6 Controlling the Hénon Map
             The main purpose of this section is to explain the results of controlling the Hénon
             map with the OGY control law. Secondary to this task is the description of the
             low-level details of how to compute the control law, k. If you have no intention of
             ever duplicating the numerical experiments in this chapter, please feel free to skip
             the remaining mathematical digressions. Nevertheless, a full description of how to
             apply the OGY technique to the Hénon map is given, specifically for those who
             wish to duplicate the work within this section.
                With that disclaimer in mind, recall that the dynamics of the Hénon map are
             described by
                                                          a − x2t + byt
                                                        (               )
                                         f (xt , yt ) =                   ,
                                                               xt
             and that the unstable fixed point is located at
                                     1/       0             1
                              xF =     b − 1 + (b − 1)2 + 4a = 0.838486 · · · .
                                     2
             In order to use the OGY control technique, we must know the values of λu , gu , and
             b, which, in turn, requires that we compute A (the Jacobian matrix), eu , es , and
             λs . We already computed A earlier in this chapter, and b is simple to compute:
                                        (           )             (   )
                                           −2xt b                   1
                                   A=                  and b =           .
                                            1     0                 0

                The remaining terms can be solved for by exploiting the properties of the eigen-
             vectors. First,0by using the fact that Aeu
                                                      0= λu eu and Aes = λs es , we can compute
             λu as −xF − x2F + B and λs as xF − x2F + B. With the eigenvalues now being
             known and using the fact that the eigenvector must be unit length, we can compute
             the eigenvectors as
                                             (    )                         (     )
                                  2     − 12   λu                 2    − 12   λs
                          eu = (λu + 1)              and es = (λs + 1)              .
                                                1                             1

             Last, we compute the unstable contravariant basis vector, which requires that we
             reference specific components of the other vectors; thus, let the notation eu1 denote
216               Controlling Chaos


                                  on            off                        on



               1.5




  (a)   x(t)     0




               -1.5

                      0                         100                        200                        300
                                                              t

               1.5




 (b)    x(t)     0




               -1.5

                  700                           800                        900                        1000
                                                              t



                          Figure 13.5   Controlling the Hénon map with p∗ equal to (a) 0.2 and (b) 0.01


                  the first element of eu , and let’s agree to use similar notation for the other vectors,
                  as needed. We can then express the unstable contravariant basis vector as
                                                       (eu1 − es1 eu2 /es2 )−1
                                                    (                          )
                                              gu =                               .
                                                           −gu1 es1 /es2

                  With this last vector, we can now use the equation k = −λu gu /guT b to derive the
                  control law.
                      This ends the mathematical presentations for this chapter. The remaining task
                  in this section is to describe the experimental constraints. You may recall that one
                  of our initially stated goals was to find a control law that would work with only
                  small perturbations. Therefore, let’s adopt the following rule: If the absolute value
217               Controlling Chaos



               1.5




  (a)   x(t)     0




               -1.5

                      0                     500                        1000                      1500
                                                           t

               1.5




 (b)    x(t)     0




               -1.5

                      0                     500                        1000                      1500
                                                           t



                  Figure 13.6 Controlling the Hénon map in the presence of noise (δ equal to (a) 0.035
                  and (b) 0.04, p∗ equal to 0.2)


                  of pt is ever larger than some small positive constant, p∗ , we will use a pt of 0. We
                  can restate this rule mathematically as

                                                            if |kT (xt − xF )| ≥ p∗
                                           #
                                              0
                                      pt =      T                                   .
                                              k (xt − xF ) otherwise

                      Figure 13.5 shows two plots for controlling the Hénon map with p∗ equal to 0.2
                  and 0.01, respectively. In the first plot, the control signal is turned on and oﬀ at
                  multiple locations so as to illustrate how long it takes to establish control and how
                  long it takes for the uncontrolled Hénon map to diverge away from the fixed point.
                  In the second plot, we attempt to control the system at all times, but show only
                  the last 300 time steps of a 1000-step run. With p∗ equal to 0.2, we are allowed
                  to influence the trajectory of the Hénon map by an amount that is approximately
                  equal to 10 percent of the range of the system. With p∗ equal to 0.01, our control
218          Controlling Chaos



                    Option Name         Option Type       Option Meaning
                    -points             integer           the length of the time series
                    -on1                integer           where to turn control on
                    -off                integer           where to turn control oﬀ
                    -on2                integer           where to turn control on again
                    -skip               integer           amount to skip initially
                    -seed               integer           random seed
                    -plimit             double            p∗ , the largest allowed size for pt
                    -A                  double            the a parameter
                    -B                  double            the b parameter
                    -gauss              double            magnitude of Gaussian noise


                                 Table 13.2   The command-line options for hencon


             force is only as strong as about 0.5 percent of the range. Therefore, the control
             signals that we are using are tiny in comparison with the natural dynamics of the
             system, but clearly not trivial.
                 This is a nice result, but in the real world, dynamical systems are influenced by
             all sorts of extraneous things that engineers generically refer to as “noise.” If we are
             using only small control forces, wouldn’t the presence of any noise be catastrophic to
             the OGY control technique? Noise does present a problem, but the situation is not
             nearly as bleak as you might think. Figure 13.6 shows two plots for controlling the
             Hénon map in the presence of noise, with p∗ set to 0.2 for both plots. The amount
             of noise is controlled by a single parameter, δ, that is multiplied by the output of a
             Gaussian random number generator that has zero mean and unit variance. For the
             first plot, we have set δ equal to 0.035, and in the second plot δ is set to 0.04. In
             both cases, the magnitude of the noise is smaller than the magnitude of the control
             force, but it is certainly not so small as to be insignificant. Nevertheless, the OGY
             control law does a pretty fair job of suppressing the chaos.


13.7 Further Exploration
             You can perform some control experiments yourself with the hencon program. The
             command-line arguments are listed in Table 13.2. You will probably want to use the
             -gauss and -plimit options to change the magnitude of the noise and the allowed
             size of the control force. With the -on1, -on2, and -off options you can select two
             points to turn the control on, and one place to turn control oﬀ. The values of these
             options must obey the relationship 0 ≤ on1 ≤ off ≤ on2 ≤ points. If you want
             to have control on at all times, simply set on1, off, and on2 all to 0.
219         Controlling Chaos



13.8 Further Reading
             Doyle, J. C., Francis, B. A., & Tannenbaum, A. R. (1992). Feedback control theory.
             New York: MacMillan.
             Garfinkel, A., Spano, M. L., & Ditto, W. L. (1992). Controlling cardiac chaos.
             Science, 257(5074): 1230.
             Ott, E., Grebogi, C., & Yorke, J. A. (1990). Controlling chaos. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
             64(11): 1196–1199.
             Ott, E., Sauer, T., & Yorke, J. A. (1994). Coping with chaos. New York: Wiley.
             Strang, G. (1980). Linear algebra and its applications. San Diego: Harcourt Brace
             Jovanovich.
             Vanecek, A. & Celikovsky, S. (1996). Control systems: From linear analysis to
             synthesis of chaos. New York: Prentice-Hall.
             Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics, or control and communication in the animal and
             the machine. New York: John Wiley.
14   Postscript: Chaos




       Order is not suﬃcient. What is required, is something much more complex. It is order
        entering upon novelty; so that the massiveness of order does not degenerate into mere
           repetition; and so that the novelty is always reflected upon a background of system.
                                                                    — Alfred North Whitehead


                       Nothing in Nature is random. . . . A thing appears random only through
                                                          the incompleteness of our knowledge.
                                                                          — Benedict Spinoza


     God has put a secret art into the forces of Nature so as to enable it to fashion itself out of
                                                              chaos into a perfect world system.
                                                                              — Immanuel Kant




     P   rior to the discovery of chaos, determinism and randomness were believed to
     be mutually exclusive principles. Today, we know that this is not the case. The un-
     certainty introduced by chaos is disturbing enough that scientists and philosophers
     have had to rethink what it means for something to be random. In the strictest
     sense of the word, randomness is used to describe events that appear to be nonde-
     terministic; for example, quantum-level events appear to fall into this category. Yet
     chaos introduces a type of phenomenon that is eﬀectively random even though it is
     deterministic.
        In one sense, we have a form of randomness due to the intricate folding of the
     state space of a system that occurs over time. This is the same property that makes
     long-term prediction of chaos impossible because of the inevitable magnification of
     measurement errors. This is certainly an interesting form of uncertainty, but it
     does not tell the whole story. In another sense, chaotic systems are close cousins
     to systems that can compute. In some cases, it is possible to cast a chaotic system
     into a type of computing system. Doing so reveals how the random-like uncertainty
     due to chaos is closely related to the uncertainty due to incomputability.
222         Postscript: Chaos



               The point that we will make is that chaos is actually a little more pathological
            than you would think. Not only does chaos introduce uncertainty from a practical
            point of view, but chaotic systems that can compute possess all of the incomputable
            properties of traditional models of computation. So not only is long-term prediction
            impossible with imperfect knowledge, but prediction may be hopeless even with
            perfect knowledge of a system’s initial conditions.
               In this third postscript, we will compare and contrast chaos, randomness, and in-
            computability. Surprisingly, there are many diﬀerent connections between the three
            diﬀerent topics that imply that all can be viewed as being diﬀerent incarnations of
            the others.


14.1 Chaos and Randomness
            The logistic map from Chapter 10 is an elegant example of chaos precisely because
            it is so simple. There exists a related one-dimensional map known as the “tent map”
            that can be transformed to and from the logistic map in such a way that the two
            maps can be clearly seen to be mathematically equivalent. This is a useful exercise
            because it is easy to show that the tent map yields behavior that is eﬀectively
            equivalent to a coin toss. Hence, by moving from the logistic map, to the tent map,
            to a coin toss, we can more clearly see how chaos is related to randomness.
                 For the purposes of this discussion, let the logistic map (with r fixed at 1) be
            written as L(x) = 4x(1 − x). The tent map, T (x), is defined as 2x for 0 ≤ x < 12
            and 2(1 − x) for 21 ≤ x ≤ 1; thus, the tent map forms a simple tent-like structure
            that has a peak at 12 . Since the logistic map is a smooth parabola while the tent
            map is piecewise linear with a discontinuous bend in the middle, it is not at all
            obvious at first glance how the two maps can be equivalent. However, there exists
            a relatively simple transformation function, f (x), that has an inverse, f −1 (x), and
            yields the two identities L(x) = f −1 (T (f (x))) and T (x) = f (L(f −1 (x))). Hence,
            the logistic map can be perfectly expressed in a form that is equal to the tent map,
            and vice versa.1 In other words, even if you never knew the mathematical form of
            the logistic map, for any starting condition, x0 , you could compute any xt by using
            only T (x), f (x), and f −1 (x), and never making reference to L(x). This also means
            that whatever we discover about one map applies directly to the other because they
            are equivalent.
                 To see how the tent map behaves over long stretches of time, we could compute
            successive iterates for the tent map just as we did for the logistic map in Chapter 10,
            but it turns out that there is an easier way of understanding what long-term iterates
            the tent map will produce for a particular starting condition. The technique requires
            us to rewrite input values in the tent map in binary form.2 For example, assuming
                                                       √
              1 The transformation is f (x) = 2 sin−1 ( x) with f −1 (x) = sin2 ( π x).
                                              π                                   2
              2 Section 5.1 on page 62 explains how fractions can be rewritten in other bases.
223   Postscript: Chaos



      that the inputs are always between 0 and 1, we can rewrite any value for x as
      0.b1 b2 b3 · · · where bi is the ith binary digit in the binary expansion. We will now
      see how T (x) transforms such a number.
          To compute T (x), we need to know if x is less than 21 , which is easy to check
      for in binary notation. If x is less than 21 , then b1 in the expansion will always be
      equal to 0. If b1 is equal to 1, then x must be at least as large as 12 .
          Now let’s assume that x is larger than 21 . Since we now know what b1 is, we
      can rewrite x as 0.1b2 b3 · · ·. We now need to compute 2(1 − x). Let’s handle the
      subtraction first. Binary subtraction works just like decimal subtraction except that
      our task is further simplified by the fact that we are subtracting from 1 which can
      be written in binary form as 0.1111 · · ·, where the 1s continue forever. This means
      that (1 − x) will be equal to 0.0b̄2 b̄3 · · ·, where b̄i is equal to the complement of bi .
      As for the multiplication portion of 2(1 − x), multiplying a binary number by 2 is
      very similar to multiplying a decimal number by 10. All that is necessary is for
      us to move the decimal point one position to the right. Thus, for x larger than 21 ,
      T (0.b1 b2 b3 . . .) is equal to 0.b̄2 b̄3 · · ·. The final eﬀect is to turn all 1s in the binary
      expansion to 0s, to turn all 0s into 1s, and to throw away the most significant bit in
      x. For x less than 12 , T (0.b1b2 b3 · · ·) = 0.b2 b3 · · · because we only need to multiply
      x by 2.
          All of this may seem like superfluous detail, but we can now examine what many
      successive iterates of T (x) will look like. Suppose that we started out with an initial
      value for x0 chosen at an arbitrary location. There are three interesting cases for
      x0 that will determine what the long-term behavior of the tent map will look like:

          • x0 is a rational number that can be written in a finite binary decimal expan-
            sion, such as, 0.5322265625 = 12 + 32
                                                1    1
                                                  + 1024 = 0.1000100001.

          • x0 is a rational number that can be written as an infinite but repeating binary
            expansion, such as, 0.333251953125 · · · = 0.0101010101 · · ·.

          • x0 is an irrational number that can be written only as an infinite binary
                                                   π
            expansion that never repeats, such as, 10 = 0.01010000011011 · · ·.

          For the first case, we know that successive iterates of the tent map will eventually
      go to 0 because the leftmost bit will always be removed at each iteration. Eventually,
      there will be only 0 bits remaining. Consequently, initial conditions that can be
      described by rational numbers with finite binary expansions will always end up at
      0. If x0 is such a number for the tent map, then f −1 (x0 ) will converge to 0 when
      iteratively applied to the logistic map.
          In the second case, the repeating periodic cycle in the binary expansion will result
      in periodic behavior in the tent map. Similarly, f −1 (x0 ) applied to the logistic map
      will result in the system converging to an embedded limit cycle.
224          Postscript: Chaos



                 For the final case, with x0 being specified by an infinite non-repeating binary
             expansion, the tent map will never repeat. It will consume a single bit of x0 at each
             iteration, but since x0 has an infinite number of non-repeating bits, it will always
             be in a diﬀerent location. The value of f −1 (x0 ) will yield the same behavior for the
             logistic map.
                 In a nutshell, this means that all irrational numbers will result in chaotic behavior
             if they are used as initial conditions for the logistic map or the tent map. Rational
             numbers give periodic or fixed point behavior. From the discussion in Chapter 2, we
             know that rational numbers actually are grossly outnumbered by irrational numbers.
             So if you were to pick a random number from a uniform distribution between 0 and
             1, you would almost be guaranteed to pick an irrational number.
                 The tent map can be turned into something that resembles a series of coin tosses
             by means of a simple convention. Suppose we wished to have access to an infinite
             number of random bits. We use an irrational starting place for the tent map, x0 ,
             and compute x1 . If x1 is less than 21 , then we call the result heads; otherwise, we call
             it tails. To perform another coin toss, we calculate x2 and use the same criterion.
             The resulting sequence of heads and tails, for almost all initial starting conditions,
             will be indistinguishable from true randomness. And since the logistic map can be
             trivially transformed into the tent map and back, the long-term behavior of the
             logistic map is eﬀectively random as well.


14.2 Randomness and Incomputability
             In the previous postscript, we briefly looked at algorithmic complexity (AC) as
             it applies to a notion of “real” or eﬀective complexity. To rehash the idea, the
             complexity of an object—be it a real number, a set of natural numbers, or a binary
             string—can be defined as the length of the shortest program that can reproduce the
             object. Under AC, incompressible objects are said to be random. In this context,
             consider the set of real numbers between 0 and 1. Every number in this range can
             be described by a potentially infinite sequence of binary digits that corresponds to
             the number’s binary expansion. Rational numbers will have a binary expansion that
             either is finite in length or has a pattern that repeats. But note that some irrational
                                   π
             numbers, such as 10     , can also be compactly expressed as a program. Thus, both
             rational and irrational numbers may be compressible.
                 But we also know from Chapters 2 and 3 that there are many more real numbers
             than there are rational numbers. Moreover, computable numbers such as π are also
             in the minority because each computable irrational number corresponds to a specific
             program; and since there is only a countable number of such programs, there is only
             a countable number of computable numbers.
                 Putting all of this together, randomness, incomputability, and chaos are inter-
             twined in how and why uncertainty becomes manifest in mathematics. If the initial
225   Postscript: Chaos



      state for the tent or logistic map is a computable number, then another program
      exists that characterizes any possible future state of these systems for that initial
      condition—even if it is irrational. But if the initial state of the system cannot be
      described algorithmically, then the future of these systems becomes indescribable
      as well. The question “Does the tent map fall into deep chaos?” can be restated as
      “Can a computer program describe the initial state?”
          While these are interesting observations, Gregory Chaitin has added yet another
      twist to these ideas that casts even greater doubt on our ability to characterize
      things found in nature. To see where all of this is going, consider the number
      described by the phrase “the smallest number that cannot be expressed in fewer
      than thirteen words.” The number described by this phrase doesn’t exist because
      the phrase we used to describe it has only twelve words. So if it existed, then it,
      in fact, could be described by fewer than thirteen words; thus, its very description
      prohibits its existence. This sentence, known as the Berry Paradox, bears some
      resemblance to one of the paradoxes from the first postscript in Chapter 4, that
      is, “This sentence has no proof.” Chaitin has described a form of uncertainty that
      exploits the ideas in the Berry Paradox but also turns out to be a more general
      version of Turing’s and Gödel’s incomputability and incompleteness results.
          Chaitin’s result hinges on the idea that although there are more random (i.e.,
      algorithmically indescribable) numbers than nonrandom numbers, we cannot nec-
      essarily tell the random numbers from the nonrandom numbers. For every program
      that can find and compress patterns in data, there are always going to be strings
      of data that cannot be compressed even though the strings may be compressible.
      This is the case because programs are incapable of recognizing patterns that are
      more complex than the programs.
          Put another way, suppose we had a program that looked for the simplest string
      of numbers that could not be computed by any program of length n. This program
      has its own length, which we can call n′ . If n is less than n′ , then this program will
      identify a string that has complexity greater than n but less than n′ . However, this
      program is incapable of producing a string that is more complex than n′ because
      doing so would produce a contradiction: n cannot simultaneously be greater than
      and less than n′ .
          In a very strong sense, Chaitin’s result is also a statement about the ability of
      humanity to describe nature. Science as a whole has the goal of providing simple
      explanations for complex phenomena. Specifically, scientists strive to explain pat-
      terns by natural laws that are simpler than the observations. To do this, a scientist
      will often look for patterns and try to mold old explanations into new ones that
      fit the new data. However, this process of building explanations is another incar-
      nation of the more general process of algorithmic compression. If an observation
      for a natural phenomenon is more complex than the algorithmic complexity of our
      identification procedure, then it is impossible to explain the data by anything more
      compact than the data themselves.
226          Postscript: Chaos



14.3 Incomputability and Chaos

             In the first postscript I briefly mentioned a billiard-ball computer introduced by
             Edward Fredkin and Tommaso Toﬀoli. This computer is capable of universal com-
             putation because it can emulate the rudiments of digital circuitry through a series
             of switches modeled after the interactions of billiard balls. In addition to Fredkin
             and Toﬀoli’s billiard-ball computer, several other types of continuous dynamical
             systems have been shown to possess the ability to perform universal computation.
                 Hava Siegelmann and Eduardo Sontag proved that a recurrent artificial neural
             network (with an infinitely precise irrational synaptic weight) could be made to
             simulate a Turing machine. Shift maps were shown to be universal computers by
             Pascal Koiran, Michel Cosnard, and Max Garzon, and by Christopher Moore (who
             also studied billiard-ball-like models of computation). The interesting thing about
             all of these models is that whenever a dynamical system is shown to be capable
             of universal computation, the dynamical system possesses, at least in part, chaotic
             dynamics. This duality of chaos and computability is primarily a result of the re-
             cursive nature of dynamical systems and computing devices. For all of these models
             of computation, if one were to write a “program” that attempted to answer an in-
             computable question, such as the Halting Problem, running the resulting program
             would place all of these systems into a potentially chaotic state. If these chaotic
             computers happen to halt, then the dynamics for the starting conditions correspond
             to the attractor of a fixed point. But if the chaotic computer never halts for such a
             question, then the system has fallen into a chaotic attractor.
                 Yet the relationship between computation and chaos goes deeper than this. As
             the examples above partially illustrate, many reasonable questions that one would
             like to ask about dynamical systems are often undecidable, in the strict sense, from
             the theory of computation. For example, it is, in general, not possible to definitively
             say that data come from a chaotic or nonchaotic source. Posing this question for a
             chaotic computer is akin to solving the Halting Problem. It is not even possible to
             determine if the state of a chaotic system will ever fall into a specific region of state
             space. If portions of a state space are known to eventually fall into a fixed point,
             then knowing this fact is equivalent to solving the Halting Problem. The reason
             for all of this uncertainty is related to the fact that symbolic mathematics (which
             can be used to formalize the questions listed above) cannot always make definitive
             statements about things that exist on a continuum.
                 Take, for example, the Three Body Problem, mentioned in the first postscript.
             The Three Body Problem, simply stated, is, given the initial position and velocities
             of three isolated bodies in space, find a set of equations that perfectly describes the
             future positions and velocities of the objects. With this equation, you would plug in
             the length of time into the future that you desired to know about, and the position
             and velocities of the bodies would have some analytical values based only on the
227         Postscript: Chaos



            initial conditions and the length of time. Henri Poincaré showed that a general
            solution to the problem does not exist.
                The motion of the bodies can be described by diﬀerential equations. The changes
            in the positions and velocities can be approximated by numerically integrating the
            diﬀerential equations. The integral of the diﬀerential equations, which is used to
            denote the analytical solution to the future values of positions and velocities, cannot
            be expressed in a closed form. In other words, as most students of calculus eventually
            find out, integration (or solving an integral) is very hard. Not only is it a diﬃcult
            task to find the right answer, but it may turn out that no answer exists. Symbolic
            mathematics, like integral calculus, is a language that can be only as powerful as its
            alphabet. The alphabet of calculus, being symbolic, is equivalent to the alphabet
            of the natural numbers. Hence, there are many things that can occur in continuous
            mathematics that cannot be described by symbolic mathematics precisely because
            there are more objects in the continuum than there are objects in the symbolic
            world. In the end, we simply do not have the language to pull it oﬀ.
                Chaos, then, has properties that are reminiscent of randomness and incom-
            putability. Under some special cases, chaos can be seen to be eﬀectively equiva-
            lent to stochastic randomness. For other special cases, chaos is equivalent to the
            deterministic actions of a computer. The dividing line between the two types of
            phenomena is the same division that separates the computable function from the
            incomputable functions.


14.4 Further Reading
             Blum, L., Shub, M., & Smale, S. (1988). On a theory of computation over the real
             numbers; NP completeness, recursive functions and universal machines (extended
             abstract). In 29th annual symposium on foundations of computer science, (pp.
             387–397)., White Plains, N.Y. IEEE.
             Chaitin, G. J. (1997). The limits of mathematics: A course on information theory
             & limits of formal reasoning. Singapore: Springer-Verlag.
             Crutchfield, J. P. & Young, K. (1989). Computation at the onset of chaos. In
             W. Zurek (Ed.), Complexity, entropy and the physics of information. Reading,
             Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
             Margolus, N. (1984). Physics-like models of computation. Physica D, 10(1–2):
             81–95.
             Ruelle, D. (1993). Chance and chaos. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
IV   Complex Systems


     Complex systems are things that consist of many similar and simple parts. Often
     the underlying behavior of any of the parts is easily understood, while the behavior
     of the system as a whole defies simple explanation. Part of the reason why complex
     systems can behave in such complicated ways is that some general forms are known
     to be capable of universal computation. This double-edged result also implies that
     the future of complex systems cannot be predicted in the general case. By changing
     the type and form of interactions that exist among the parts of a complex system,
     the type of global behavior can be varied such that the complex system as a whole
     can be globally goal-seeking while only local information is passed around by the
     parts. This means that a collective form of computation can take place without an
     explicit global algorithm.
         Chapter 15 introduces a simple and nearly canonical form of a complex system,
     known as a cellular automaton. Chapter 16 shows how collective systems composed
     of individual agents can demonstrate self-organized behavior. Chapter 17 reveals
     how mixtures of competition and cooperation can produce many diﬀerent and in-
     teresting types of behavior that are seen in nature. Chapter 18 illustrates how a
     collective form of computation can be performed by feedback neural networks with
     fixed synapses. Finally, Chapter 19 examines how the global form and function of
     composite objects can be influenced by the parts of the system and the types of
     interactions permitted.
15   Cellular Automata




      If patterns of ones and zeros were “like” patterns of human lives and death, if everything
     about an individual could be represented in a computer record by a long string of ones and
     zeros, then what kind of creature would be represented by a long string of lives and deaths?
                                                                            — Thomas Pynchon


       The chess-board is the world; the pieces are the phenomena of the universe; the rules of
                                                  the game are what we call the laws of Nature.
                                                                               — T. H. Huxley




     W      hereas chaos is the science of how simple things produce complex behavior,
     complexity is the study of how complex collections of simple units produce a wide
     variety of behavior. Continuing with the discussion from Chapter 1 on emergent
     phenomena, examples of complex systems include autocatalytic chemical sets (which
     may explain the origins of life); cellular regulation through gene excitation and
     inhibition; multicellular animals; collective “super-organisms” such as ant colonies,
     bee hives, flocks of birds, schools of fish, and oceanic reefs; and larger collections
     of organisms such as ecosystems, economies, and societies. Don’t be distracted by
     the fact that I have called each of these complex systems a collection of “simple”
     things. To be sure, there is nothing simple about a single cell, or about a stock
     trader, for that matter. The important point is that even if we limit the types of
     interactions that can occur among agents (thus “simplifying” the essence of what
     an agent is, relative to its environment), extremely rich and complex behavior can
     still result.
         Also note that the phenomena listed above occur on many diﬀerent levels—from
     the molecular level of autocatalytic sets all the way up to the global level of the
     world economy. In this book part we will be able to sample only a small subset of
     the many types of complex systems that can be found. Nevertheless, the primary
     goal of this book part is to provide you with enough detail concerning the nature
     of complex systems that you will be able to identify and appreciate these same
     qualities in phenomena that we do not examine explicitly. In this first chapter on
232           Cellular Automata



                                              ⇐= Space =⇒
       ⇑
             ci−r (t − 1)   · · · ci−1 (t − 1) ci (t − 1) ci+1 (t − 1) · · · ci+r (t − 1)
      Time
                                                  ci (t)
       ⇓

                     Figure 15.1    The neighborhood of a one-dimensional cellular automaton


              complex systems, we will examine a type of computing machine known as a cellular
              automaton (commonly abbreviated as CA), which is a dynamical system that is
              discrete in both space and time. Our goal here will be to convey a sense of breadth
              in the types of behavior that can be seen—from simple fixed-point dynamics, to
              periodic limit cycles, all the way to chaos. In between order and chaos lies a
              special region sometimes called the “edge of chaos,” where true computation may
              be possible.
                  The formalism for cellular automata was invented by John von Neumann (with
              some suggestive help from his close friend Stanislaw Ulam) in the 1940s as a frame-
              work in which to study the process of reproduction. Von Neumann was interested
              in the essence of reproduction and not in any particular implementation of the pro-
              cess. Thus, he purposely abstracted away all of the details of, say, how animals
              reproduce, and instead concentrated on the simplest mathematical framework that
              would allow information to reproduce. As with most of his life’s work, von Neu-
              mann was decades ahead of just about everyone else. Others continued to study
              CA after von Neumann’s premature death from cancer in 1957, but it would be
              more than a decade before cellular automata attracted widespread attention in the
              scientific community.
                  The first type of cellular automaton that we will examine in this chapter is
              one-dimensional, remarkably simple to describe but capable of all of the types of
              behavior listed earlier. Afterward, we will look at Conway’s Game of Life, a two-
              dimensional cellular automaton that is capable of emulating any Turing machine,
              and is therefore capable of universal computation. We will conclude this chapter
              with a summary of natural phenomena that can be modeled by cellular automata.


15.1 One-Dimensional CA
              Imagine a linear grid that extends to the left and right. The grid consists of cells
              that may be in only one of a finite number of states, k. At each time step, the next
              state of a cell is computed as a function of its neighbors local in space. We will
              denote the radius of a cell’s relevant neighborhood by r. In Figure 15.1 the 2r cells
              that fall to the immediate left and right of the center cell, i, are shown to form a
              neighborhood that consists of a total of 2r + 1 cells. We will denote the state of cell
233   Cellular Automata



                               ci−1 (t)   ci (t)   ci+1 (t)   ci (t + 1)
                                  0         0         0            0
                                  0         0         1            1
                                  0         1         0            1
                                  0         1         1            1
                                  1         0         0            1
                                  1         0         1            1
                                  1         1         0            1
                                  1         1         1            0


       Table 15.1    One possible rule table for a one-dimensional CA with r = 1 and k = 2


      i at time t by ci (t). The index of the cell indicates the position of the cell in the
      linear grid such that cell i − 1 is just to the left of cell i.
          The nice thing about one-dimensional CAs is that a lengthy chunk of a CA’s
      history can be characterized on a two-dimensional grid. Moving to the left or right
      of the grid corresponds to moving in space, while moving up and down on the grid
      corresponds to looking at a cell’s history in time. By convention, we will agree that
      time flows in a downward direction; thus, the cell immediately below another cell
      represents the next state.
          Considering Figure 15.1 once again, the only cells that are shown are those that
      have a direct eﬀect on the future state of ci (t). As a concrete example, imagine
      that the number of states, k, is equal to 2 and that the radius, r, is equal to 1.
      Furthermore, let the states be denoted by either a 0 or a 1. We can characterize a
      deterministic set of rules for a CA’s next-state function by a simple lookup table,
      as shown in Table 15.1.
          Table 15.1 essentially defines a finite-state automaton. To determine the next
      state of a cell, we look at the table entry that contains the cell’s current state
      and the state of its two immediate neighbors. Notice that the left three columns
      of Table 15.1 contain all permutations for a CA with cells with two states and a
      neighborhood that consists of three cells. It would be possible to have an entirely
      diﬀerent rule table for diﬀerent cells, but even when each cell is constrained to obey
      the same single rule table, exceptionally interesting behavior can arise. Figure 15.2,
      below, shows an alternative representation of the CA rules in Table 15.1 that may
      be a bit more intuitive to understand. In the figure you can see how the state of
      three cells maps to the next state of the center cell in the neighborhood.
          In general, for a CA with a neighborhood size of 2r + 1 and with each cell having
      the ability to take k possible states, a rule table that completely specifies the next-
      state function of a cell must have k 2r+1 entries in it. Thus, for this example with
      k = 2 and r = 1, there are 23 = 8 entries in the rule table.
234   Cellular Automata



          For the last column of Table 15.1, which contains the next-state values for ci (t),
      we could have filled in the values with anything we wanted. Since there are eight
      rows in the table, there are 256 diﬀerent rule tables that could have been used,
      which doesn’t seem like such a large number, all things considered. However, if
      we take k = 10 and r = 2, which intuitively seem like small numbers, then a rule
      table for this CA would have to have 105 , or 100,000, entries. The number of legal
      rule tables will therefore be 10100,000 . To put this number in perspective, there are
      only about 1080 molecules in the universe; thus it is fair to say that there exist
      a mind-boggling number of CA rule tables that we will never be able to examine
      simply because there are not enough time and computational resources available in
      the whole universe to do so.
          Table 15.1 is still, perhaps, overly verbose, in that the rule table can be easily
      compressed if we adopt just one more convention. To see this fact, note that an-
      other way of stating the rules in Table 15.1 is the following: If all of the cells in
      a neighborhood are on or all of the cells in a neighborhood are oﬀ, then the next
      state is oﬀ; otherwise, the next state will be on. Taking the sum of the states of
      the cells in a particular neighborhood, it can be seen that our CA yields a 1 if, and
      only if, the sum is equal to 1 or 2. Looking once again at Figure 15.2, it is easy
      to see that this particular interpretation of our rule table is correct; only the two
      configurations with homogeneous states map to a new state that is oﬀ.
          If we simplify the set of possible rules such that we consider only the sum of
      the states in a neighborhood, then our rule tables will dramatically shrink in size
      and our rules will be invariant in the ordering of the cells. (This means that if we
      randomly shuﬄe the cells within a neighborhood, the next state will still be the
      same, since we are looking only at the sum of the states.) Regarding the size of the
      rule table, with a radius of r and with k states, we must have (k − 1)(2r + 1) + 1
      entries (instead of k 2r+1 ) in a rule table to account for each possible sum total.
      However, even with this simplification, using the example that was used before
      with r = 2 and k = 10, there are still 946 unique CA rule tables, which is nothing
      to sneeze at.
          In this section and the sections that follow, we will examine many diﬀerent CA
      rule sets. I will never use more than ten states; thus we can safely denote each state
      by the numbers 0 through 9. Also, since the rule table needs to be only k(2r + 1)
      in length, we can represent the entire rule table by one long decimal number with




                Figure 15.2    A graphical representation of the rules in Table 15.1
235   Cellular Automata




        Figure 15.3    The first few steps from simulating the time evolution of Table 15.1


      k(2r + 1) digits. Rewriting the rule table from Table 15.1 in this manner gives us
      the string “0110” which obviously is much more compact.
          Let’s now simulate the first few steps of the time evolution of the cellular au-
      tomaton specified by the rules in Table 15.1 and Figure 15.2. Using an initial state
      of “11” as a seed, Figure 15.3 shows the results of running our CA for a few time
      steps. After one time step the initial seed of “11” doubles in size to form “1111.” At
      the second time step, the two center cells are now victims of overcrowded conditions
      in that they and their two respective neighbors are on; thus, their next state is to
      turn oﬀ. At this point, you should be able to confirm that each subsequent step in
      the figure is correct. To further aid in your understanding of how CAs work, you
      may want to simulate with pencil and paper the same rules from Table 15.1 but
      with a diﬀerent starting conditions.
          Running a CA on pencil and paper is fine for CAs that are small in area and
      duration; however, to look at more elaborate CAs we will ultimately need to sim-
      ulate the time evolution on a computer. Therefore, we will briefly go over some
      conventions that I have used in the CA software written for this chapter. To com-
      pletely specify how we are to simulate a particular CA, we need to agree on a size
      (or width) for the linear array of cells, and the number of time steps (or height)
      that the CA is to be run. For the height, our choice is limited to a finite number;
      however, for the width, there are several diﬀerent ways that we could implement
      things. The simplest choice for implementing the width would be just to pick a size
      and leave it at that. The problem with this is that the cells on the two edges may
      have only half the number of neighbors that the other cells have. One could imag-
      ine allowing the array width to grow as new cells are needed, with the assumption
      that newly added cells are in the oﬀ state prior to being added (which is sort of
      what we did in the Figure 15.3), but this presents another set of problems from an
      implementation point of view. A common convention—and one that we will use
236          Cellular Automata




                     (a)                                                 (b)


             Figure 15.4 Two time evolution histories for the CA described by Table 15.1: (a) the
             initial state consists of all zeros except for the two center cells being on (b) a random
             initial state is used


             almost without exception—is to allow cells on one edge to be the neighbors of the
             cells on the opposite edge, thus forming a ring of cells. This is a nice solution to
             the problem, since it allows each cell to have the same number of neighbors, and
             can be implemented on a grid with a predetermined area.
                 The final thing that we need to specify is the initial state of all the cells in the
             ring. Two common strategies are to use either a random assignment of states to
             cells or to start almost all of the cells in the oﬀ state and allow a few cells to be on
             so as to form an initial seed (as in Figure 15.3). Figure 15.4 shows both of these
             techniques for the CA described by Table 15.1, with a grid width of 512 and 256
             time steps shown. The plot on the left is an extension of Figure 15.3, which you
             may wish to compare with the Sierpinski triangles from Figure 6.10 on page 90.
             The plot on the right shows the results of running the same CA rule table with a
             random initial condition.


15.2 Wolfram’s CA Classification
             In the 1980s Stephen Wolfram almost single-handedly resurrected cellular automata
             research, giving the subject a firm mathematical analysis that rivaled any other con-
             tribution to CA research at the time. Wolfram is a physicist by training, and most
             of his work on cellular automata is far too detailed to adequately describe in this
             book; however, I will describe the gist of one aspect of Wolfram’s contributions to
             the subject of CA. During the 1980s, Wolfram’s research was primarily concerned
             with one-dimensional CAs, as described in the last section. One of his contributions
             was to establish four diﬀerent CA classes. Before we take a close look Wolfram’s
             classification scheme, let’s briefly review the theoretical limits of the types of pat-
             terns that can be generated from one-dimensional CAs.
237               Cellular Automata



      00040001002000200020030000004   00100001000000200001030000014    00001001000000200400030100004




                                       Figure 15.5   Examples of Wolfram’s Class I


                      With a ring consisting of n cells and k possible cell states, there are at most k n
                  unique configurations of a row of cells. For all but trivial cases this number will
                  be extremely large—easily more than the number of electrons in the universe—but
                  finite. Even though the legal state space of the CA as a whole is enormous, the fact
                  that it is finite implies that for any one-dimensional CA with a finite state space, if
                  we were to run it long enough, the CA would eventually have to repeat itself. Don’t
                  be too impressed by this fact, since we could say the same thing about your home
                  computer as well.
                      With that disclaimer said, we are now ready to examine Wolfram’s classification
                  scheme, which consists of four classes:
                      • Class I. CAs in the first class always evolve to a homogeneous arrangement,
                        with every cell being in the same state, never to change again.
                      • Class II. CAs in the second class form periodic structures that endlessly cycle
                        through a fixed number of states.
                      • Class III. CAs in the third class form “aperiodic,” random-like patterns that
                        are a lot like the static white noise on a bad television channel.
                      • Class IV. CAs in the fourth class form complex patterns with localized struc-
                        ture that move through space in time. The patterns must eventually become
                        homogeneous, like Class I, or periodic, like Class II.
                  Figures 15.5, 15.6, 15.7, and 15.8 show examples of the four classes. In each figure,
                  the long number strings on the top of the plots denote the rule table used. You can
                  plug the rule string into the program ca, which I used for all of these figures, as
                  described at the end of this chapter.
                      There are some interesting analogies that we can make between the behavior of
                  CAs and the topics covered in the rest of this book. Class I CAs are very much
                  like trivial programs that halt after only a few execution steps. Class I CAs are
                  also similar to dynamical systems that fall into a fixed point attractor, discussed
                  in Chapter 10. In either case, the behavior of the system is simple and not very
                  interesting, but serves as an example of one extremity of the range of CA behavior.
238               Cellular Automata



      00000031020020203240030004044   00001121100001210000330300004   00001401020200200002030302404




      00300201400020204030031200004   00011001000020200222030220004   03000041040342200000034030004




                                      Figure 15.6   Examples of Wolfram’s Class II
239   Cellular Automata




                                                           i = 0;
               while(TRUE) {                               while(TRUE) {
                 for(i = 0; i < 10; i++)                     print("%d\n", i);
                   print("%d\n", i);                         i = i + 1;
               }                                           }



                          (a)                                         (b)


      Table 15.2 Two program fragments that are similar to Class II CAs and dynamical
      systems: (a) simple periodic CA and fixed point dynamical systems (b) unbounded periodic
      CA and quasiperiodic dynamical systems


          Class II CAs are repetitive and bear some resemblance to programs that execute
      in an infinite loop, or dynamical systems that fall into limit cycles. In Figure 15.6
      there are really two distinct types of Class II CAs. The first, second, and fourth
      through sixth plots in the figure illustrate what I would call “simple periodicity,” in
      that their behaviors can be adequately captured in the finite-sized space. The third
      plot in the figure diﬀers from the other five in that it continuously wraps around the
      CA space. It is periodic because we have limited the amount of space in which it
      can travel to a ring. If we allowed for an infinite amount of space, then the floating
      structure would fly away forever, never to return to any previous state but always
      similar to some previous state. I’ll refer to this type of Class II CA behavior as
      “unbounded periodicity.” The diﬀerence between simple and unbounded periodicity
      can be better appreciated when compared with program types. Consider the two
      C program fragments in Table 15.2, which are both designed to fall into an infinite
      loop.
          The program fragment on the left of Table 15.2 will spit out the digits 0 through
      9 and then repeat the sequence forever. This program fragment is not unlike the
      simple periodic Class II CA because the program cycles through a fixed number of
      states and does so even with a finite amount of memory. The program fragment
      on the right of Table 15.2 is similar to the unbounded periodic. If a program like
      this were run on a machine with infinite memory (some theoretical device like a
      Turing machine), then the program would never repeat and never halt, but forever
      enumerate the natural numbers. In reality, computers have finite memory, and
      on a real computer this program fragment would repeat forever, but at a certain
      point—determined by the precision of the computer’s representation of numbers—
      the program will start to repeat itself when the maximal integer for the computer
      is reached and then overflows back to 0.
240               Cellular Automata



      00341231422243203022431433004   03200231014042203133232122134    03204311404411204124130212024




                                      Figure 15.7    Examples of Wolfram’s Class III


                      In the first case we have a pure form of periodicity that is independent of the
                  memory constraints of the underlying computer. If your computer has finite memory
                  or if your cellular automaton operates on a ring of finite space, then you will still
                  get periodicity. In the second case we have periodicity that is a result of the finite
                  nature of the universe. If we could magically create a real Turing machine that had
                  an infinite tape or a CA with an infinite space, then the second type of behavior
                  would no longer be periodic. It is only when space is finite that this second type of
                  periodicity emerges. These two types of periodicities are also analogous to simple
                  periodicity and quasiperiodicity in continuous dynamical systems, since the latter’s
                  ability to never strictly repeat itself depends on the density of the real number line.
                      We next consider Class III CAs, as shown in Figure 15.7. Like Class I, Class
                  III is boring, but for opposite reasons. Whereas Class I CAs fall into boring static
                  configurations, Class III CAs are so random-like that there is little visual appeal
                  to be found in them. Wolfram and others compare Class III to chaotic dynamical
                  systems, which is an interesting comparison for many reasons. First, given a finite
                  space of “reasonable” size, Class III CAs are almost guaranteed to never repeat
                  themselves, and even when the do they can have extremely long cycles. Class III
                  CAs also show sensitivity to initial conditions: If you alter the starting state by
                  just flipping a couple of cells, the resulting behavior will be radically diﬀerent from
                  what would have emerged otherwise. Finally, Class III CAs are very likely to have
                  embedded limit cycles of short duration; with the right starting state you could force
                  such a system into regular behavior similar to Class II CAs, but like embedded limit
                  cycles in chaotic attractors, the limit cycles will probably be unstable, in that any
                  slight perturbation will force the system back into chaotic behavior.
                      Drawing a comparison between programs and CAs, Class III is very similar to
                  the types of programs that are pseudo-random number generators. Given an initial
                  seed, a pseudo-random number generator can produce sequences that are so uncor-
                  related that they easily pass most tests for randomness. With a slightly diﬀerent
                  starting seed, a pseudo-random number generator will produce a dramatically dif-
                  ferent sequence, just the way the initial configuration of a Class III CA is sensitive
                  to slight variations.
241               Cellular Automata




      00010341010031200000230004034   00130001404000212300030320004   00000121402100202012230004004




                                      Figure 15.8   Examples of Wolfram’s Class IV
242         Cellular Automata



                We will now look at Class IV CAs, the most interesting of Wolfram’s classes.
            Class IV CAs, in all likelihood, consist of CAs that can perform computations, with
            some of them being capable of universal computation. The first observation that
            one may make when looking at the time evolution of a Class IV CA is that it is
            diﬃcult to describe; it is not regular, periodic, or random. Instead, it contains a
            little bit of each of these types of behavior.
                It is as if the dynamical behavior of the CA as a whole is hovering near a
            boundary between chaos and periodicity. Within localized regions of space and time
            the CA may have windows of homogeneous configurations, or oscillate between a
            small number of states, or even boil with chaos. In his early writings on Class IV
            CAs, Wolfram was at a loss to pair Class IV with any particular type of dynamical
            system behavior. Current thought on the subject by many scientists is that Class
            IV is but one facet of a more fundamental type of phenomenon that is seen in
            real-world dynamical systems that can process information.
                To reiterate some of the topics covered in Chapter 3, computer programs come
            in a wide variety of flavors: some never halt; some do halt, but with varying space
            and memory requirements; and some programs express such complex ideas (e.g., “Is
            Fermat’s Last Theorem true?” from Chapter 8) that we are at a loss to determine
            whether or not they halt. I made the claim in several of the previous chapters
            that there is a sort of dividing line between simple and complex behavior that is
            seen in many diﬀerent types of phenomena and ideas. “Is some point a member of
            the Mandelbrot set?” is an easy question to answer when the point is well within
            the interior or well outside the exterior of the M-set. “Does some program halt?”
            is another easy question to answer, if the program trivially falls into one of the
            categories of simple programs that halt or simple programs that never halt; but in
            between the two regions lies a region of undecidability. Similarly, we saw in the last
            postscript chapter that whenever a dynamical system is capable of computation,
            it possesses, at least in part, something akin to chaos (which falls between plain
            orderly periodicity and high-dimensional random-like processes).
                In short, on an intuitive level, we can see how there appears to be a transition
            in CA rule space that proceeds in the order of Class I, Class II, Class IV, and Class
            III; thus, Class IV is somewhere between the other classes. The question that we
            will examine in the next section is how do we view a CA rule space in such a way
            that the transition between the classes is visible on a more than intuitive basis.


15.3 Langton’s Lambda Parameter
            Chris Langton, one of the earliest evangelists of the artificial life movement, greatly
            contributed to the study of cellular automata with a parameterization scheme that
            allows the relationship between Wolfram’s classes to be more plainly seen. Like
            Wolfram, Langton ran thousands of CA simulations and cataloged the rules that
243   Cellular Automata



      yielded the types of dynamics described in the last section. Langton knew of Wol-
      fram’s classes, but was really interested in finding a sort of virtual knob that he
      could turn to coerce the behavior of a CA from one class to another. If Class IV is
      truly between Class II and Class III, then there must be some way of mapping CA
      rules into scalar numbers that show the same relationship.
          The first step that Langton took was to define a quiescent state, which we can
      think of as the state that we define as being inactive or oﬀ. Next, Langton considered
      all of the rules that defined the mapping from one neighborhood configuration into
      another. Some of these rules will map a cell into the quiescent state and others will
      map into the other states. We can split these two rule types into two distinct sets,
      with the union of the sets being all of the rules. Recall that the total number of
      entries in the rule table is equal to k 2r+1 . For simplicity, let’s refer to this number
      as N . Letting the number of rules that map to the quiescent state be nq , we can
      define a special parameter as the fraction of all the rules that map to a non-quiescent
      state:
                                                 N − nq
                                            λ=           .
                                                     N
         Computing λ for the CA rules from the earlier examples requires a little bit
      of work because our compact representation for the rule tables is not uniformly
      distributed in the rule space. For example, with a neighborhood size of three (r = 1)
      and two states (k = 2), one table that we used was “0110,” which means that
      neighborhood sums of 1 and 2 map to the on state, and everything else maps to
      oﬀ. There is exactly one way for a CA of this type to have a neighborhood sum of
      0 or 3 (“000” or “111”), but three diﬀerent ways for a neighborhood sum of 1 or 2
      (“001,” “010,” “100,” and “110,” “101,” “011”). Therefore, the rules for a sum of
      1 or 2 should be weighted to reflect this fact when we compute λ. Table 15.1 shows
      exactly how we have to break down the rule space to correctly compute λ. Since
      two rules map to oﬀ and the others map to on, we get λ = (8 − 2)/8 = 43 for this
      example.
         But exactly what does λ tell us? Looking at some particular values, a λ of
      exactly 0 means that all rules map to the quiescent state; with λ equal to exactly
      1, all rules map to non-quiescent states; and with λ equal to 1 − k1 , statistically
      speaking, all states will be represented equally in the rule table. Therefore, λ = 0
      represents the most homogeneous rule table and λ = 1 − k1 represents the most
      heterogeneous rule tables.
         Mapping a whole rule table into a single scalar number is a little bit dangerous, in
      that one should be wary about concluding too much based on only a single example.
      For one particular rule table the value of λ may not be too informative, but if we
      look at several CA rule tables with similar λ values, then in a statistical sense we
      may be able to see some interesting trends.
         We will now consider the values of λ for the examples from Wolfram’s four CA
      classes. Since all of these CAs have five states, in theory the interesting values of
244   Cellular Automata




                      Fixed                   Complex
                                 Periodic                   Chaotic




                0.0                                     λ                         1.0



      Figure 15.9      Langton’s schematic representation of CA rule space characterized by the
      λ parameter


      λ should be between 0.0 and 0.8. For the fixed point-like Class I, the three values
      of λ are 0.266880, 0.188749, and 0.229069, with an average of 0.22823267. These
      values are all on the low end of the spectrum, and not surprisingly they have simple
      behavior because they are near the extreme of λ = 0.
          For the periodic Class II, the λ values are equal to 0.522330, 0.432013, 0.326822,
      0.441331, 0.430848, and 0.483174, with an average of 0.43941967. In general, these
      values are near the middle of the range, where we would expect things to be inter-
      esting. To be fair, when selecting the examples for Class II, I was biased against
      very simple periodic CAs because I wanted the examples to have rich behavior;
      thus, for periodic CAs, my class II examples are somewhat complex.
          For the random-like Class III, the λ values are equal to 0.821146, 0.787008, and
      0.841306, with an average of 0.8164867. Notice that these are all near the extremity
      of λ = 0.8, where the rule space is the most heterogeneous. Therefore, it is not too
      surprising that all of these CA are random-like.
          Finally, for the complex Class IV, the three values of λ are 0.430669, 0.514982,
      0.559872, with an average of 0.501841, which agrees with our intuition that complex
      CAs reside somewhere between the periodic and the random regions of rule space.
          Figure 15.9 shows a schematic representation of Langton’s view of CA rule space.
      At the two extremes we find fixed point and chaotic behavior. In between the two
      extremes are periodic dynamics and truly complex behavior that resides in a special
      region near the center. Langton has compared these diﬀerent regions to the diﬀerent
      states of matter. Fixed points are like crystals in that they are for the most part
      static and orderly. Chaotic dynamics are similar to gases, which can be described
245         Cellular Automata



            only statistically. Periodic behavior is similar to a non-crystal solid, and complexity
            is like a liquid that is close to both the solid and the gaseous states. In this way, we
            can once again view complexity and computation as existing on the edge of chaos
            and simplicity.
                 While Langton’s λ parameter can sometimes be used to roughly characterize the
            type of behavior that one could expect from a particular CA, it has at least three
            weaknesses that should be noted. First, it is possible for a CA rule set to have a
            high λ-value and still produce very simple behavior. This can happen if most of the
            rules map to the same non-quiescent state, in which case the CA will tend to fall
            into fixed point behavior dominated by this one state. Thus, care must be taken
            in picking the state that we call quiescent. Second, since a CA can conceivably
            perform universal computation, if we think of a CA rule set as a “program” and an
            initial configuration as “input” to this program, then we know that λ may be very
            uninformative, in that sophisticated programs can demonstrate a wide variety of
            behaviors. Last, even if the λ parameter is modified to account for the initial state,
            it is impossible to have a method for computing λ such that it always reveals what
            the long-term behavior of the CA would look like. We know that this is impossible
            because if such a method for calculating λ existed, then we could use this method
            to distinguish between CAs that halt and never halt, which is identical to solving
            the Halting Problem. The moral of the story is that determining the complexity of
            a CA or a program is an extremely complex subject that is itself intractable in the
            general case.


15.4 Conway’s Game of Life

            In the late 1960s, John Conway was motivated to extend von Neumann’s work as
            described earlier. Von Neumann had succeeded in describing a self-reproducing cel-
            lular automaton, but the machine itself was enormous and took approximately 150
            pages to describe. Conway wanted to refine the description of a cellular automaton
            to the simplest one that could support universal computation. Conway’s cellular
            automaton had only two states, on and oﬀ, and had a very simple set of rules for
            determining what the next state of the system would be. He christened his creation
            “The Game of Life” because of the binary (live or dead) state of the cells and the
            lifelike rules that were used. Since Life is a two-dimensional cellular automaton, it
            can be simulated with checkers on a checkerboard, which helped Conway and his
            students to find many patterns that encouraged their belief that Life could support
            universal computation. In 1970 Martin Gardner described Conway’s work in his
            Scientific American column. Gardner’s article inspired many people around the
            world to experiment with Conway’s rules, which eventually led to the final pieces
            of how the Game of Life could support universal computation in what was surely a
            globally collaborative eﬀort.
246   Cellular Automata




                                        NW       N     NE
                                          ❅     ,
                                           ❅❘ ❄
                                              ✠
                                              ,
                                         W ✲ ✛    E
                                           ,✒✻■
                                              ❅
                                          ,     ❅
                                        SW       S      SE



                   Figure 15.10     The neighborhood of Conway’s Game of Life


         As with the one-dimensional CA, the next state of a cell in Life is a function of
      the states of the cell’s nearest neighbors. The only neighbors that we consider are
      the eight cells that form the immediate perimeter of a cell, which we can label by
      the directions N, S, E, W, NE, NW, SE, and SW, as shown in Figure 15.10. The
      rules for the time evolution of Life are quite simple:

         • If a live cell has less than two neighbors, then it dies (loneliness).

         • If a live cell has more than three neighbors, then it dies (overcrowding).

         • If an empty cell has three live neighbors, then it comes to life (reproduction).

         • Otherwise (exactly two live neighbors), a cell stays as is (stasis).

      Notice that the rules contain the most basic properties of how real-world creatures
      interact with the basic constraints on population density and the conditions for
      “reproduction.”
          One could start a grid with a random initial configuration and watch how the
      system evolves in time; in fact, there are screen savers available for virtually every
      computer that do just this. In this section we will be able to observe only a very
      small portion of the types of behavior that are possible in Life. Instead, the goal
      of this section is to illustrate how Life, being in Langton’s critical area, is capable
      of universal computation. We will not be able to give a full and rigorous proof
      that Life is a universal computer, but we will at least see how computations can be
      carried out in principle.
          To start, we will examine three simple classes of objects that can be found in
      Life. Our first class consists of simple static objects that do not change over time as
      long as nothing interferes with them. Figure 15.11 shows some examples of static
      objects in Life. In each configuration, every cell is such that if it is filled, then it
      has two or three live neighbors, and if a cell is empty, then it has less than two or
      greater than three neighbors; thus, if a cell is alive or dead, it will always remain so.
      Having the ability to form static objects is important from a computational point
247   Cellular Automata




               Figure 15.11   Examples of static objects in Conway’s Game of Life




          Figure 15.12    Examples of simple periodic objects in Conway’s Game of Life




              Figure 15.13    Examples of moving objects in Conway’s Game of Life
248   Cellular Automata



      of view because fixed objects—being persistent in time—allow for a basic type of
      memory.
          Another requirement for computation is the ability to count in some manner,
      which is needed to synchronize events parallel in time and to coordinate iterative
      operations. Figure 15.12 illustrates three types of periodic structures in Life that
      perform this basic operation.
          The final functional requirement that we will consider is a computing device’s
      ability to move information to and fro. Figure 15.13 shows two types of moving
      objects. The first moving object is sometimes referred to as a glider and moves one
      diagonal space in four time steps. The second object is sometimes called a fish and
      moves two horizontal (or vertical) squares in four time steps. Both gliders and fish
      can be rotated to make them travel in any of the eight possible directions. Gliders
      and fish are not the only types of moving objects in Life, just two of the simplest.
          Moving objects can be used to construct other objects by having them collide
      in precise ways, which is illustrated in Figure 15.14. The four images in the figure
      are a sort of poor man’s time-lapse photography. The top image shows the initial
      configuration of the breeder , which consists of ten elaborate moving ships that
      either lay down static objects or emit gliders designed to collide with other objects
      in precise ways.1
          The two ships in the center of the front row each lay down static pieces which
      are later modified by the other ships. The remaining ships, that flank the trail,
      emit gliders that collide with the static objects that were previously laid down.
      Each colliding glider modifies the static object by adding a new piece of machinery.
      The final two pieces, provided by the outermost ships, bring the assembled parts
      into motion. Each newly assembled part is itself a glider gun that emits gliders at
      regular intervals. In the last portion of Figure 15.14, the screen is now filled with
      glider guns; the breeder continues on its infinite journey, building more and more
      glider guns, which build more and more gliders.
          The process of recursively assembling pieces to make larger and more compli-
      cated objects can be carried to the extreme of building a self-reproducing machine,
      thus realizing von Neumann’s goal in an elegant manner. It would theoretically be
      possible to build a device in the Life universe that assembles a copy of itself, sets
      the copy in motion, and then moves on to build more self-replicating machines.
          Seeing that Life is capable of self-replication, it is now a much simpler matter
      to consider how Life is capable of universal computation. Virtually every digital
      computer implements each of its operations in terms of the logical primitives AND,
      OR, and NOT, which we will write as A ∧ B, A ∨ B, and ¬A, for the arguments
      A and B. Strictly speaking, only one of AND or OR is needed, since each can be
      implemented by the other with the help of the NOT operation.2 No matter what
         1 The pattern for the breeder is distributed with the marvelous Life implementation xlife.
         2 In general we can rewrite each operation as A ∧ B = ¬(¬A ∨ ¬B) and A ∨ B = ¬(¬A ∧ ¬B).

      Try these out to see that it really works.
249   Cellular Automata




                Figure 15.14   Examples of a breeder in Conway’s Game of Life
250           Cellular Automata


                                                                                              ....
                                                                                                 ..
                                                                                              ....
                                                                                                      ✲ ..........         ✲A∨B
                                                            ✻                                                  ✻

                    ¬A                  B   !       ✲ ..........       ✲A∧B               B     !     ✲ ..........         ✲
                        ✻                                   ✻                                                 ✻

      A !       ✲ ..........            A !         ✲ ..........                          A !         ✲ ..........
                        ✻                                   ✻                                                 ✻

                        ..                                 ...                                               ...
                    ..... ....                          .... ....                                         .... ....



         ...
      .... .... - Glider or Fish Gun            - Glider or Fish Eater             ! - Data Stream                    .......
                                                                                                                      .. . - Collision



                                       Figure 15.15                 Constructing logical primitives in Life


              you want to compute, be it the square root of 17 to seventeen decimal places or
              the shortest route that connects ten cities, you could in theory build one enormous
              logical circuit that computes the result, or you could even build a general-purpose
              digital computer. The important point is that if something can provide the basic
              logical primitives, then it is capable of universal computation. We will now see how
              Life can compute these primitives.
                  In the discussion that follows, I will use the term glider to generically refer to
              a moving object, and glider gun to refer to a device that emits a glider. We can
              represent a binary sequence of numbers by a stream of gliders that are spaced at
              known intervals. To specify that a location has a value of 1, we simply place a glider
              at that location. If there is no glider at a location, then the value of the digit is
              0. This is very similar to how a computer serial line sends a stream of data as a
              sequence of high-low pulses. It may be helpful to think of a glider stream as being
              equivalent to a pulse of electrons, but this analogy is a bit strained.
                  In the remaining discussion, consult Figure 15.15 as needed. We will first con-
              sider how to compute the logical negation of a binary sequence, which is illustrated
              on the left portion of the figure. The glider gun on the bottom of the NOT circuit
              emits a continuous stream of gliders, while the data stream source emits a glider
              only when there is a value of 1 in the stream; thus, when the current bit of A is
              a 0, there will be a hole for the glider coming from the glider gun to fly through,
              But when the current bit is a 1, the hole is filled with another glider, forcing a
              collision that annihilates both gliders. The gliders from the glider gun that survive
              the encounter correspond exactly to the empty locations in A, yielding the logical
              negation of A as the output.
251         Cellular Automata



                We can build on the NOT circuit to form an AND gate, as shown in the middle
            portion of the figure. Consider the collision that occurs just to the right of B,
            which has the stream ¬A coming in from the bottom. We want there to be a glider
            arriving at A ∧ B only when both A and B are 1. If A is 1, then there must be a
            hole for B to fly through. But if A is 0, the ¬A glider will collide with B (if B is
            not a 0, that is). The glider eater at the top of the circuit is there only to destroy
            the extraneous gliders.
                The right portion of Figure 15.15 shows how an OR circuit can be built from
            part of the AND circuit. The output of the AND that goes to the glider eater is
            equal to ¬A ∧ ¬B, since gliders from ¬A survive only if ¬B is true to provide a
            hole. Negating this stream one more time with another glider collision yields A ∨ B,
            which completes the circuit. As before, the extraneous stream is destroyed by a
            glider eater.
                To fully realize a digital computer implementation built on top of Life, we would
            have to solve some other problems, such as synchronization issues and memory
            requirements, but a computer science theorist would say that those are only boring
            details, in that we have already solved the key problems in principle.


15.5 Natural CA-like Phenomena
            Perhaps the most interesting aspect of cellular automata, and of complex systems
            in general, is that they describe phenomena that occur on radically diﬀerent time
            and space scales. This is in sharp contrast to the two “sexiest” branches of physics,
            quantum mechanics and relativity, which deal with phenomena on only the most
            extreme scales, the absurdly tiny and the outrageously enormous. Complexity in
            the form of complex systems is a universal and ubiquitous phenomenon that is found
            in the very small, the very large, and everywhere in between. In the chapters that
            follow, we will sample complex systems that reside on varying time and space scales.
            In the remainder of this section, we will briefly look at some real-world examples
            with the purpose of conveying the breadth that is found in complexity.

            Statistical Mechanical Systems Prior to the advent of supercomputers find-
            ing a home in the physics communities, scientists usually had to be content with
            purely statistical descriptions of low-level stochastic systems. But now that power-
            ful computers are readily available to all scientists, it is possible for the theorist to
            experiment and the experimentalist to theorize by actually programming the laws
            of physics into a computer model so as to simulate the millions of interactions that
            occur on the elementary level of atoms and molecules. For example, a lattice-gas
            automaton is a model of how gas or plasma interacts in a local space. The beauty
            of this model is that a lattice-gas CA uses only local interactions, in that each
            molecule “cares” about only its nearest neighbors, and nothing else. With such a
252   Cellular Automata




      Figure 15.16    Two runs from the program hp, which emulates the hodgepodge machine


      simulation, a scientist can control the “temperature” of the system to observe how
      the collective behavior changes. Similarly, other statistical systems, such as models
      of ferromagnetism and the process of annealing metals, can be simulated in a similar
      manner.

      Autocatalytic Chemical Sets Of relevance to the origin of life, an autocatalytic
      chemical set is a collection of chemicals that is self-catalyzing and therefore capable
      of highly nonlinear dynamics. For example, suppose that two chemical reactants, A
      and B, could in theory combine to form the reagent C, but only on a very slow time
      scale. A catalyst, which we’ll call D, is a chemical that can increase the rate of a
      reaction by orders of magnitude; thus, in the presence of D, A and B will produce C
      at a very rapid rate. Things get interesting when C catalyzes yet another reaction
      (say one consisting of D and A), to produce a catalyst for another reaction, and so
      on.
          Since each molecule in the chemical soup can interact only with other molecules
      that are located near the first molecule, local interactions, combined with a paral-
      lel evolution of the simultaneously occurring chemical reactions, yield remarkably
      accurate pictures of how these systems self-organize.
          Martin Gerhardt and Heike Schuster have created a CA rule known as the hodge-
      podge machine that does a remarkable job of capturing the types of behavior seen
      in chemical systems such as the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction. Figure 15.16 illus-
      trates two runs from hp, a program that implements the hodgepodge machine. The
      spiral-like patterns are seen in many biochemical reactions.

      Gene Regulation Similar to the last example, a single gene product can inhibit
      or encourage the activation of another gene. In this way, one gene can activate
      another, which activates a third, and so on. Through this regulation process, cells
      that have identical DNA can perform many diﬀerent types of tasks via specializa-
253   Cellular Automata



      tion. Yet, one prominent diﬀerence between the process of gene regulation and
      an autocatalytic chemical set is that genes are not inhibited by space in terms of
      aﬀecting other genes. Despite this fact, biological systems are remarkably stable
      systems that are capable of functioning in a wide variety of environments.
          Why this is so has been explained, at least partially, by Stuart Kauﬀman, who
      pioneered the use of random Boolean networks as models of biological processes.
      Kauﬀman wired a large collection of cells together with randomly selected Boolean
      functions. A random Boolean network is exactly equivalent to having a cellular
      automaton with an inhomogeneous rule table that allows cells to have diﬀerent rules
      for each cell (unlike the CA that we played with in this chapter, which had cells that
      all had the same rule table). With such a random collection of rules, one would think
      that the random networks would display only chaotic-like behavior; however, with
      some minor constraints on the amount of connectivity in his networks, Kauﬀman
      found that the networks would often stabilize to low-order periodic behavior, which
      is a seemingly counterintuitive result. Kauﬀman has referred to this phenomenon
      as “order for free.”
          But this is not the whole story. The real beauty in Kauﬀman’s work was that
      he was able to correlate the behavior of the random Boolean networks with a num-
      ber of properties found in biological systems. For example, Kauﬀman was able to
      accurately predict the number of cell types in a species, given the number of genes
      that the species possessed, by considering only the behavior of a Boolean network.


      Multicellular Organisms The first multicelled organism in all likelihood was
      the result of several single-cell organisms pooling resources and abilities so as to be-
      come more proficient at the task of survival. At some point, joined but genetically
      dissimilar cells merged their DNA and developed a mechanism for cell specializa-
      tion through gene regulation. By doing this, organisms could begin to build more
      complex types of creatures with fully developed digestive, circulatory, nervous, res-
      piratory, and other systems.


      Colonies and “Super-Organisms” The combination of parallelism, specializa-
      tion, and local interactions with limited autonomy has been exploited by many
      species in the insect world, such as ants, termites, bees, and wasps. Specialization
      at this level is exemplified by the presence of diﬀerent castes. One incorrect view of
      how such collectives work is that the queen rules the nest, which couldn’t be further
      from the truth. An equally acceptable explanation is that the queen is held captive
      by the sterile castes, being nothing but a machine for producing oﬀspring. Neither
      view is quite correct, since the relationship between all of the castes is at least partly
      mutually exploitative and cooperative. Regardless of the control hierarchy (or lack
      thereof), insect colonies are able to produce remarkable results that go well beyond
      the scope of any individual insect or caste.
254   Cellular Automata



      Flocks and Herds Clearly, flocking structures are related to there being safety
      in numbers; however, there are many open questions about flocking that deal with
      the level at which safety is “optimized” by a flock. When birds of a flock travel,
      they will in general tend to travel in the direction the rest of the flock is moving.
      But simultaneously, birds probably solve two other subproblems associated with
      this task. First, they prefer to be an optimal distance from their nearest neighbor,
      since they don’t want to be too close or too distant from the other birds. But
      second, birds will often attempt to fly in the middle of a flock so as to minimize
      their exposure to predators.
         Similar behavior is observed in fish and herd animals as well. From a hindsight
      point of view, it is not surprising that animals prefer that their neighbors be eaten
      instead of themselves. Nevertheless, the local goal optimization by a collection of
      autonomous agents yields a globally eﬀective solution, that is, there is safety in
      numbers because the average exposure of a cluster of animals is less than that of
      individuals moving in isolation.

      Ecosystems As we saw in Chapter 12, isolated ecosystems often display a rich
      variety of population dynamics. A warm summer can trigger plant growth, which
      increases the population of a grazing species, which feeds a predator population,
      which will then diminish the food source for the predators, and so forth. Within
      a consistent environment, an ecosystem can reach a stable point; however, pertur-
      bations to the system in the form of weather changes and the introduction of new
      species can aﬀect the short- and long-term dynamics of an ecosystem.
         It is also worth noting that diﬀering environments promote varying amounts of
      genetic diversity (e.g., rain forests versus deserts). Complexity may help to explain
      how we can promote ecological stability without sacrificing genetic diversity.

      Economies and Society Economic systems depend on both competition and
      cooperation. Without competition, a centrally controlled economy is doomed to
      certain failure due to stagnation. Complementary to this, purely self-serving busi-
      ness units in an anarchical economic system fail to compete with a collection of
      business units that cooperate on a limited scale. Again, there seems to be a happy
      middle ground with an ideal mixture of cooperation and competition. An even more
      fascinating aspect to this is that the combination of competition and cooperation
      can spontaneously form because of the increased yield in eﬃciency.
         Scientists specializing in complexity theory have used these notions to partially
      explain the rise and fall of religions, countries, and cultural ideas.

         We could continue this list with such odd phenomena as collapsing sandpiles
      and seashells (as shown in Figure 15.17), but I think the point has been made that
      complex systems occur on nearly every level of observation. This first chapter on
      complex systems has been largely devoted to presenting the theoretical background,
255          Cellular Automata




             Figure 15.17 Seashells and CA: The process by which seashells are created has been
             likened to a one-dimensional CA


             providing an introductory feel for the breadth of the phenomena, and examining
             low-level cases of complex systems. Over the next few chapters in this book part,
             we will examine complex systems that occur on larger scales. In Chapter 16 we
             will look at collectives composed of autonomous agents, such as flocking birds and
             ant colonies. In Chapter 17 we will examine competition and cooperation in the
             iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma. And in Chapter 18, we will see how analog systems
             not unlike the other complex systems in this book part can solve problems from
             classical computer science.


15.6 Further Exploration
             This section contains a brief tutorial on how to use ca, which is the program used
             to generate most of the images in this chapter; life, which implements Conway’s
             Game of Life; and hp, a program that implements the hodgepodge machine, as
             briefly discussed in the last section. A list of program options can be found in
             Table 15.3. Many of the options are self-explanatory or are common to many of
             the other programs in this book; however, options specific to ca, life, or hp will
             be discussed in greater detail.
                The most important thing to remember when using ca is that you must always
             use either -rules or -lambda but not both. The -rules option will allow you to
             specify the rule of your choice. The rules should be specified by a string of integers.
             Any of the rules listed with the figures will work. You can also use -lambda to specify
             a random rule that has a λ-value close to the specified value. Note, however, that
256   Cellular Automata




             Option Name      Option Type       Option Meaning

             Options Common to all Three Programs
             -width         integer          width of the plot in pixels
             -height        integer          height of the plot in pixels
             -seed          integer          random seed
             -inv           switch           invert colors?
             -xmag          integer          magnification for X windows
             -term          string           how to plot points

             Options only for ca
             -states           integer          number of CA states
             -radius           integer          radius of CA neighborhood
             -wrap             switch           use a wraparound space?
             -rules            string           CA rules to use (< 0 is random)
             -init             string           starting state (< 0 is random)
             -lambda           double           lambda-value for rules
             -sq               switch           enforce strong quiescence?
             -bin              switch           binary colors?

             Options Only for life
             -extra           integer           number of extra border pixels
             -wrap            switch            wraparound world?
             -infile          string            initial configuration file

             Options Only for hp
             -freq            integer           plot frequency
             -diag            switch            diagonal cells are neighbors?
             -wrap            switch            use a wraparound space?
             -steps           integer           number of simulated steps
             -states          integer           number of cell states
             -g               double            infection progression rate
             -k1              double            first weighting parameter
             -k2              double            second weighting parameter


                    Table 15.3   Command-line options for ca, life, and hp
257   Cellular Automata



      the -lambda option is really only a suggestion, since not every λ-value between 0
      and 1 can be represented by every CA, but the program will do its best to get a
      value that is close. When you use -lambda, the randomly generated rule and the
      actual λ will be displayed. Similarly, if you specify your own rule, its λ-value will
      be displayed.
          The -init option allows you to specify an initial configuration, which should
      be a string of integer digits. Regardless of the length of the configuration that is
      specified, the program will attempt to center the initial string in the middle of the
      CA space, filling every other cell with the quiescent state. If a negative integer is
      supplied as the initial string, then a random initial state will be used.
          The -sq option is turned on by default; thus, using it turns oﬀ strong quiescence.
      Strong quiescence ensures that if each cell in a configuration has the same state,
      then the next state of the center cell will be the same. Having strong quiescence
      turned oﬀ is in general not a good idea, since your CA will tend to be very chaotic.
          Finally, the -bin option can be used to force the display to be strictly binary,
      with the quiescent state mapping to one color (say black) and every other state
      mapping to the other (white).
          Using the life program is very simple. The -infile option is used to specify
      an initial configuration for the the program, which should be in the Portable Bit
      Map (PBM) file format. The source code for life comes with several example
      files. Since the width and height can be determined by the initial configuration, the
      -width and -height options are used by the program only if they are bigger than
      the dimensions of the pattern in the initial configuration. Similarly, the -extra
      option can be used to pad the initial configuration with the specified number of
      extra cells running around the perimeter of the pattern. This is useful if your life
      simulation needs extra “working space” to move about in. Finally, the -wrap option
      determines if the life CA space wraps around from one edge to another. The life
      program is interesting in that it demonstrates how to write such a simulation with
      a small amount of code; however, there are many Game of Life simulations freely
      available (such as xlife) that are much more sophisticated and have many more
      features.
          As for hp, the first four options unique to it are not very critical. The normal
      mode of hp is to plot out each and every state at every time step. If you are
      simulating a large hodgepodge machine, you may wish to use -freq n to specify
      that only every nth time step is plotted. If the -diag switch is used, then the
      neighborhood of a cell will consist of the eight nearest neighbors; otherwise, only
      the nondiagonal neighbors are oﬃcially part of the neighborhood. With the -wrap
      switch you can make cells on an edge be the neighbors of cells on the opposite edge.
      Since hp is supposed to emulate chemical reactions, it may be more realistic to have
      this switch oﬀ.
          The last four options are crucial in that they specify the dynamics of the hodge-
      podge machine. The number of possible states that a cell may have is specified
258         Cellular Automata



            by the -states option. Let the possible cell states be denoted by the integers 0
            through n. A cell in state 0 is said to be “healthy,” while a cell in state n is said
            to be “ill.” Anything in between is considered “infected.” Within a given cell’s
            neighborhood, let the number of infected neighbors be denoted by Ninf and the
            number of ill cells be denoted by Nill . Moreover, let S be the sum of the states of a
            cell’s neighbors and its own state. With the parameters k1 , k2 , and g, as specified
            by the options -k1, -k2, and g, we update a cell based on the following rules:3

                • If a cell is healthy, then its next state is equal to ⌊Ninf /k1 ⌋ + ⌊Nill /k2 ⌋.

                • If a cell is infected, then its next state is equal to ⌊S/(Ninf + 1) + g⌋, with the
                  understanding that if the update equation yields a next-state value greater
                  than n, then we replace it with n.

                • If a cell is ill, then at the next time step its state is 0.

            The combination of k1 , k2 , and g specifies how fast infections spread. With a
            suitable choice of parameters, one can produce reactions that are relatively stable,
            periodic, or complex.


15.7 Further Reading
             Berlekamp, E., Conway, J. H., & Guy, R. (1982). Winning ways for your mathe-
             matical plays. London: Academic Press.

             Dewdney, A. K. (August 1988). The hodgepodge machine makes waves. Sci. Am.,
             225(8): 104–107.

             Fowler, D. R., Meinhardt, H., & Prusinkiewicz, P. (1992). Modeling seashells.
             Comp. Graphics, 26(2): 379–387.

             Gardner, M. (October 1970). Mathematical Games: The fantastic combinations
             of John Conway’s new solitaire game ‘Life’. Sci. Am., 223(4): 120–123.

             Li, W., Packard, N., & Langton, C. G. (1990). Transition phenomena in CA rule
             space. Physica D, 45(1–3): 77–94.

             MacRae, N. (1992). John von Neumann: The scientific genius who pioneered the
             modern computer, game theory, nuclear deterrence, and much more. New York:
             Pantheon Books.

             Meinhardt, H. (1995). The algorithmic beauty of sea shells. New York: Springer.
               3 The expression ⌊x⌋ denotes the floor operator which rounds down its argument to the greatest

            integer less than x.
259   Cellular Automata



       Poundstone, W. (1985). The recursive universe. New York: William Morrow.
       von Neumann, J. (1966). Theory of self-reproducing automata. Urbana: University
       of Illinois Press.
       Wolfram, S. (1984a). Cellular automata as models of complexity. Nature, 311(4):
       419–424.
       Wolfram, S. (1984b). Universality and complexity in cellular automata. Physica
       D, 10(1–2): 1–35.
       Wolfram, S. (1994). Cellular automata and complexity. Reading, Mass.: Addison-
       Wesley.
16   Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization




                                                       Some primal termite knocked on wood.
                                                            And tasted it, and found it good.
                                                          And that is why your Cousin May
                                                          Fell through the parlor floor today.
                                                                             — Ogden Nash


                                Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise.
                                                                             — Proverbs 6:6


       . . . and the thousands of fishes moved as a huge beast, piercing the water. They appear
                              united, inexorably bound by common fate. How comes this unity?
                                                                                 — Anonymous




     L   oosely speaking, an autonomous agent is a unit that interacts with its envi-
     ronment (which probably consists of other agents) but acts independently from all
     other agents in that it does not take commands from some seen or unseen leader,
     nor does an agent have some idea of a global plan that it should be following. In
     other words, an agent simply does its own thing. With this definition, we will
     explore how multiple agents can seemingly perform tasks that appear to follow a
     global plan. The process by which autonomous agents interact in such a way as to
     create global order is known as self-organization, and is seen in many diﬀerent types
     of phenomena: chemical soups, gene regulation systems, super-organisms, animal
     collectives, and economic systems, to name a few.
         In this chapter we will explore three examples that are inspired by the real-
     world animal kingdom: termites, ants, and birds. In each case, the model of animal
     behavior that we will be exploring only grossly approximates the respective real-
     world counterpart. Nevertheless, it is surprising to see that simplified models are
     still capable of astonishingly complex behavior.
262         Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization



               There are two main themes to this chapter. The first theme is what Stuart
            Kauﬀman calls “order for free,” or the fact that complex systems seem to tend
            toward orderly behavior. The second theme is that even when agents obey simple
            or even stupid rules, it is not always possible to predict the future behavior of such
            a system.


16.1 Termites
            In many animal species, large collections of creatures cooperatively build structures
            that appear to have some sort of planning behind them. In the case of beavers, it
            is almost as if a foreman beaver is busily consulting blueprints and directing the
            placement of individual sticks to construct a dam. Clearly this is not the case, but
            exactly how does such order arise in such a directionless scheme?
                Beavers are relatively intelligent creatures, so to make the question more inter-
            esting, let us consider a collection of agents that are so individually simple that they
            primarily wander around randomly. Mitchel Resnick has studied a wide variety of
            systems that consist entirely of very primitive agents. One noteworthy example of
            Resnick’s creatures is a theoretical termite that follows the following simple rule:

                • Wander around aimlessly, via a random walk, until the termite bumps into a
                  wood chip.

                • If the termite is carrying a wood chip, it drops the chips and continues to
                  wander.

                • If the termite is not carrying a wood chip, it picks up the one that it bumped
                  into and continues to wander.

                Clearly, Resnick’s rule is about as simple a plan as possible. There is no room
            for intelligence in this scheme at all, and it seems highly unlikely that one or more
            termites following this rule could produce anything more meaningful than just a
            random mess. Or could they?
                Figure 16.1 shows six stages from simulating a simple rule set with a small
            number of termites. In the initial configuration the termites’ universe consists of a
            square grid that has wood chips randomly distributed throughout the entire space.
            As with nearly every other CA-like simulation in this book, the square grid wraps
            around, in that the points on an edge are considered to be the neighbors of points on
            the opposite edge. Almost immediately after beginning the simulation, the termites
            are moving chips into small clusters. As time goes on, the clusters become larger
            and more defined.
                Hundreds of thousands of time steps have elapsed by the time we get to the
            sixth and final plot, but at this point the wood chips are in a fairly well defined
            collection. This is obviously a suboptimal method for collecting wood chips, and
263   Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization




      Figure 16.1   Termites randomly placing wood chips according to a simple rule produce
      order


      it is extremely frustrating to watch the process, because after a while the termites
      will at times mindlessly ferry chips back and forth. However, the very fact that as
      time increases, so does the order of the system is a remarkable result.
          There are several simple changes that we could make in the simulation to get
      diﬀerent results. For example, instead of performing a strict random walk, Resnick
      had his termites make a random left or right turn and then take a step (instead
      of just taking a random step in any direction), which prevents the termites from
      wasting time by moving forward, then backward. In addition to this, Resnick made
      sure that after dropping or picking up a piece of wood, the termites would always
      make a 180 degree turn, which reduces the chance that a termite will pick up a
      piece, then immediately drop it. With these changes, Resnick’s termites almost
      always collected the wood chips into a single large pile.
          For the images displayed in Figure 16.1, I modified the termites so that after
      dropping a wood chip, they would randomly jump to an unoccupied place on the
      grid. As shown in the figure, this change resulted in clusters that, while connected,
264          Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization



             were more spatially distributed, which makes sense if you consider that the modifi-
             cation does not encourage nearby piles to be merged, as the standard rule does.
                 There are many other variations that one could make to improve the termites’
             eﬃciency. To start, we could give them sight, so that they could see a juicy piece of
             wood in the distance. We could have the termites pick up only chips that are in piles
             less than some threshold in size. We could even have the termites simultaneously
             pick a source and a destination for a particular chip, with the constraint that they
             will always attempt to move chips to larger piles.
                 I haven’t tried these particular changes, but I would be willing to bet that they
             would greatly increase the termites’ ability to self-organize their environment. But
             the real point of this exercise is that no master termite has to declare that the pile
             will be place in a particular location, nor is there any termite giving orders. The
             termites all act independently of each other, yet they are capable of producing a
             structure that has global organization despite the constraint that they must act
             locally.


16.2 Virtual Ants
             In this section we will consider a virtual ant created by Chris Langton that is able
             to produce a diﬀerent type of complex behavior. It is possible to simulate multiple
             ants—and we will consider multiple ants toward the end of this section—but for
             the purposes of this introduction we need to consider only a single ant. Like the
             termites, our ant is located on a grid that wraps around from edge to edge. At each
             time step, the ant is always facing in one of four directions: north, south, east, or
             west. All of the points on the grid are painted either black or white. At each time
             step, the ant acts according to the following simple rule set:

                • The ant takes a step forward.

                • If the ant is now standing on a white point, then it paints the point black and
                  turns 90 degrees to the right.

                • Otherwise, if the ant is standing on a black point, then it paints it white and
                  turns 90 degrees to the left.

                 Figure 16.2 illustrates eight steps that an ant would take starting from an initially
             blank grid. One diﬀerence between Langton’s virtual ants and the cellular automata
             in the last chapter is that for almost all of the CAs we considered, it was possible
             for the CA configuration to fall into a state that had the property that it could
             have been achieved from multiple previous configurations, which is to say that the
             CAs are time irreversible. This is clearly true since, in the case of Class I CAs,
             for example, a CA could fall into a configuration consisting of all dead cells. How
             did the CA get there? Unless we know the CA’s whole time history, we can only
265   Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization




      Figure 16.2    Eight steps of Langton’s virtual ant, starting from an initially blank grid


      rarely answer this question, because it could have evolved to its present form from
      multiple places in the state space.
          This is interestingly not the case for Langton’s virtual ants. Looking at any of
      the eight stages shown in Figure 16.2, we can always “unwind” the simulation in
      time because the rules for Langton’s ant are time reversible. If the ant is standing
      on a black cell, then we know that at the previous time step the cell was white
      and that the ant just made a 90 degree turn to the right. In fact, not only is the
      ant’s entire future determined, but so is its past. This would seem to imply that
      Langton’s ants, while obviously simple in the parsimony of the rule set, are also
      simple over a global spatial and temporal scale.
          We will see shortly that this conclusion is not true, since time reversibility does
      not necessarily imply global simplicity. To get a feel for why this is so, we only
      need to notice that the ant is hopelessly recursive in its prior actions. Look again
      at Figure 16.2; the ant quickly starts to interact with grid locations that it has been
      at in the past, which means that the ant’s future state and future behavior are a
      function of all its past actions. Thus, if we were to randomly flip the color of a
      cell at some point in the past, the ant’s entire future could be dramatically altered.
      Thus, in a way, Langton’s ants possess a form of sensitivity to initial conditions.
          But does this mean that an ant will always behave in a way that appears ran-
      dom in the long term? Not necessarily. If we continue to simulate the ant from
266   Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization




                         Figure 16.3    A virtual ant building a highway



      Figure 16.2 for another 10,000 time steps or so, the ant will indeed form a chaotic-
      looking mess that has little or no structure. But after another 250 or more steps,
      the ant will start to build what James Propp, who discovered this phenomenon,
      calls a highway.
          Figure 16.3 shows an ant highway created from an initially blank configuration.
      The highway in this case extends along the north-west direction, but an ant can
      build a highway that flows in any of the four diagonal directions. If the ant’s
      universe consists of an infinite cell space that is initially blank, then the ant will
      happily build the highway forever. In our toroidal wraparound universe the highway
      must eventually intersect a place in the ant’s grid space where the ant has been
      before. Such a “bump in the road” will usually force the ant back into a chaotic-like
      behavior, but it will often spontaneously start to build another highway, and so on.
      In all of the simulations that I have personally run with a single ant, given enough
      time, the ant’s universe would always converge to a random-like mess. Eventually,
267   Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization




                   Figure 16.4    Two virtual ants reversing one another’s work



      the ant must fall into some sort of cyclic pattern, given the finite (but large) number
      of states that the ant and the grid can be in, but I suspect that such periodic cycles
      are, almost without exception, profoundly long in length and duration.
          But what happens if we let more than one ant move in a single cell space, thus
      allowing them to interact? Because of the reversible nature of the ants’ rules, two
      virtual ants can collide with one another in such a way that each starts to undo
      the other’s work. Figure 16.4 shows such a situation. Notice that in the last step,
      the configuration of the grid is the same as in the first step, but now the ants have
      exchanged positions and they point in opposite directions. The situation displayed
      in Figure 16.4 depends on the black ant being updated before the white ant. Hence,
      between the fourth and fifth steps the black ant lands on a white cell, turns it black,
      then turns right, which allows the white ant to turn the black cell back to white,
      and then turn left. The collision shown in Figure 16.4 is not especially interesting;
      however, if two ants are allowed to move around for a while before they intersect
      one another, then during the remainder of the simulation they will often go into a
      stage of unbuilding highways and removing random-like patterns, thus cleaning up
      the cell space.
          Two or more ants can also exploit a type of synergy by cooperating in the con-
      struction of extremely elaborate highways. Figure 16.5 illustrates such a highway
      that was built by two ants. During this particular simulation, the two ants suddenly
268   Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization




      Figure 16.5   Two virtual ants can build more complex structures than a single ant acting
      alone



      collided in the manner shown in Figure 16.4, which forced them to completely undo
      all of their work to bring the cell space back into an empty configuration! But
      then, since the ants had swapped initial positions and were facing in the opposite
      directions of how their counterpart started out, they went on to build yet another
      highway system. Eventually they collided once again, undid all of the second high-
      way system, and proceeded to rebuild the first. Thus, for this particular simulation,
      the ants oscillated through a very elaborate cyclic pattern.
         When three or more ants are allowed to roam about in the same space, even
      more interesting things can occur. Consider the case of three ants. Suppose that
      at some point two of the ants intersect in such a way that they start reversing the
      each other’s work. Everything proceeds as you would expect, except for the fact
269   Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization



       Can One Ant Ever Reverse Itself ?                                         Digression 16.1

        Two ants can collide so that they start to reverse each other. But can one ant intersect
        its own path and start reversing that path? Let’s assume that we are even allowed
        to help the ant by placing an object in the cell space that acts as a sort of mirror,
        so that any ant hitting it in a precise manner will eventually get turned around and
        start reversing its own path.

        To prove that such an object cannot exist, we only need to take note that for each
        cell in the space, an ant can enter a cell only either vertically or horizontally, but not
        both. Also, if a cell is entered vertically, then the ant must exit horizontally. The
        vertical cells will spatially alternate with the horizontal cells, sort of like the red and
        black squares of a checkerboard.

        Now, suppose that our magic ant mirror exists and that the ant first hits it by moving
        into it from the left. Let’s refer to this first cell of the mirror as cell X. In order for the
        ant to reverse itself, it must eventually return to cell X from the top or the bottom,
        because it must make a right-angle turn and return along the path it came from. But
        to do this, cell X would have to have the property that it can be entered vertically
        and horizontally, which cannot be true. Therefore, a single ant cannot reverse itself.

        E. G. D. Cohen and X. P. Kong used a similar technique to prove that an ant’s
        trajectory cannot be contained in a finite area with a finite configuration.




      that the third ant may be running around and causing minor havoc in the work of
      the other two ants. As a result, the two reversed ants will hit a cell that the third
      ant has more recently visited, thus halting their reversed progress. Consequently,
      it is common to see highways being built, then only partially unbuilt.
          Besides changing the number of virtual ants in a cell space, we could vary the
      simulation in other ways. Probably the simplest (besides changing the number of
      ants) is to start the cell space with an initial configuration that is not empty. A
      more elaborate variation has been independently proposed by Greg Turk, Leonid
      Bunimovich, and S. E. Troubetzkoy that involves a generalization of Langton’s ants
      into a form where the cells can have n states instead of just two. With n states we
      can represent an ant’s behavior by an n-bit rule string: if an ant lands on a cell
      in state i, then if the (i + 1)th bit of the string is 1, the ant turns right; otherwise
      it turns left. Also, when an ant leaves the cell that was in state i, it changes the
      cell to state i + 1, or to 0 if the cell was in state n − 1. With this generalization,
      Langton’s virtual ant is represented by the rule string “10.”
          Some scientists have analytically studied the properties of these generalized vir-
      tual ants and obtained some interesting results. One obvious result is that any
270          Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization



             generalized virtual ant with a rule string that consists of all 0s or all 1s will never
             do anything more interesting than travel around in a little square. A not so obvious
             result is due to E. G. D. Cohen and X. P. Kong (see the digression box for a similar
             result); it states that any virtual ant defined by a rule string that has at least one
             0 and one 1 cannot be contained in a finite-sized box, that is, it will always escape
             any boundary that you try to place around it.
                 Highway-building, as a property of virtual ants, is found in many other types
             of ants besides Langton’s. Some examples of generalized virtual ants will behave
             chaoticly for hundreds of thousands of steps and only then spontaneously break
             into highway-building behavior. For other examples, no one knows if they will ever
             build highways because chaotic patterns persist even after hundreds of millions of
             time steps.
                 Ian Stewart (1994) has made an interesting observation regarding our lack of
             knowledge about the long-term behavior of some of these virtual ants. To para-
             phrase, for any of these ants we know their Theory of Everything, in that all of
             the “physical” laws that govern the ant’s universe are simple and known to us. We
             also know the initial configuration of the ant’s universe. Yet we are helpless to
             answer a simple question: Does the ant ever build a highway? Putting this all in
             perspective, if physicists ever uncover a Theory of Everything for our universe, and
             even if we deduce the initial state of the universe, we may still be helpless to deduce
             the long-term behavior of our own universe. Thus, as Stewart has said, the Theory
             of Everything in this case predicts everything but explains nothing.
                 It may be that a highway-building proof exists for these ants. We don’t know
             at this point. But as we saw in the last chapter, other cellular automata that are
             only moderately more complicated than these virtual ants are known to be capable
             of universal computation, and it is therefore known to be impossible to prove many
             things about their long-term behaviors.


16.3 Flocks, Herds, and Schools
             In the previous sections we saw how simple agents acting in isolation could display
             self-organizational properties despite their simplistic behavioral limitations. In the
             case of termites, adding more agents to the simulation did no harm, in that self-
             organization persisted even when multiple termites were acting as if they were alone;
             however, two termites were incapable of producing a qualitatively diﬀerent type of
             behavior than a single termite. For the virtual ants, we briefly saw how two or more
             ants could create structures that no single ant could create. In this section we will
             take these ideas to an extreme by witnessing a type of agent that always produces
             uninteresting behavior by itself, but displays a stunning variety of behaviors when
             interacting with many similar agents. Specifically, in this section, we will examine a
             model of how collections of animals, such as flocks, herds, and schools, move about
271         Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization




      (a)                       (b)                          (c)                          (d)


            Figure 16.6 Four boid rules: (a) avoid flying too close to others; (b) copy near neighbors;
            (c) move towards center of perceived neighbors; (d) attempt to maintain clear view.


            in a space in a way that appears to be orchestrated.
                In the late 1980s, Craig Reynolds created a model of animal motion, named
            boids, that he used to simulate the motion of a flock of birds. Reynolds’s approach
            was to make each boid in the flock an independent agent that attempts to follow
            a simple set of rules so as to independently optimize various goals. This approach
            is radically diﬀerent from a more explicit technique that scripts the motion of each
            individual boid, since none of the boids—and not even the programmer—have any
            idea where the boids will eventually fly oﬀ to.
                The goals that the boids try to achieve are very simple and are for the most part
            intuitive. The following list of rules explains these goals and the simplest technique
            that a boid can exploit to achieve each goal:

               • Avoidance. Move away from boids that are too close, so as to reduce the
                 chance of in-air collisions.

               • Copy. Fly in the general direction that the flock is moving by averaging the
                 other boids’ velocities and directions.

               • Center. Minimize exposure to the flock’s exterior by moving toward the
                 perceived center of the flock.

               • View. Move laterally away from any boid that blocks the view.

            Reynolds used only the first three goals; the fourth is my own creation that I added
            for no better reason than that it seemed like a good idea. We will see how the boids
            behave with and without the fourth rule later on. All of the rules are geometrically
            illustrated in Figure 16.6, which should be helpful in the discussion that follows.
                The avoidance rule is probably the most fundamental, since it is the one rule that
            every boid can never completely ignore. In this spirit we consider the avoidance rule
            absolute, in that the copy and center rules are inactivated for any oﬀending boid
            that invades another boid’s personal space. This is an important heuristic because
272   Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization



      it makes little sense for a boid to simultaneously attempt to avoid, and to copy or
      center on, any other boids that are too close.
          The copy rule enforces a form of cohesion that keeps the flock together over
      the long term. Presumably, boids in a flock would want to stay together for many
      reasons (safety in numbers, stay with mate, etc.), but, as Reynolds has pointed out,
      the copy rule also acts as a first approximation to collision avoidance, since if every
      boid is flying at the same velocity and heading, the risk of collisions is reduced.
      Clearly, it is not very realistic for every boid to be aware of every other boid’s
      velocity and heading. So, to make things more realistic, we allow the boids to have
      only a fixed viewing angle from which they can “see” other boids. Additionally,
      their “vision” is further limited by enforcing the constraint that they can see only
      a finite distance.
          The center rule is a very greedy method for boids to watch out for themselves at
      the expense of their neighbors. Since almost every type of locomotion group found
      in nature has a natural enemy in the form of a predator, it is to any individual
      agent’s advantage to stay away from the edge of a flock, herd, pack, or school.
      After all, it is far better from an evolutionary point of view for an agent’s neighbor
      to become a predator’s meal than for itself to be the meal.1 We place the same
      visual constraints on the center rule as we did for the copy rule, except for the
      fact that we allow the boids to use a diﬀerent viewing radius for the purpose of
      averaging neighbors’ positions. Thus, conceptually a boid can try to maintain the
      same heading and velocity as every other boid that it sees within a hundred yards
      or so, but it attempts to stay in the center only of a smaller group within 100 feet,
      for example. Notice that while the copy rule depends on the other boids’ headings
      and speeds, the center rule depends only on the other boids’ positions.
          As mentioned earlier, the view rule is my own addition. While the rule seems
      biologically plausible to me, the only fieldwork I have done on the subject is to watch
      geese from my backyard, so you should take it with the grain of salt it deserves. I
      added this last rule because the only way I could ever coerce Reynolds’s boids into
      a “V” formation was to partially blind them with an unrealistic viewing angle. The
      view rule works by moving the boid in a direction perpendicular to the vector that
      joins the first boid and the boid that is interfering with its sight. Since there are
      two such perpendicular paths, the boid always chooses the direction that is closer to
      its original heading. This has the side aﬀect that the view rule will never encourage
      a boid to slow down, which is probably not very realistic, but it still seems to have
      the desired eﬀect. We also allow the boids to vary what they consider to be visual
      interference by having a parameter that defines a narrow region by an angle and
      distance.
         1 If this sounds a bit Machiavellian, consider the case of penguins jumping into water. If some

      penguins are safely in the water, then another penguin can safely assume that there aren’t any
      predators around. But which penguin jumps in first if no penguins are already in the water? The
      characteristic of sacrificing one’s self should be quickly removed from the gene pool, so how do
      penguins resolve the problem? Simple. They often try to push each other in first (Dawkins, 1976).
273   Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization



         Since we have defined the diﬀerent types of goals that a boid will attempt to
      achieve, we now need to consider how a boid will combine all of these urges into a
      single action. Since each rule specifies a suggested direction in which to fly, we take
      a weighted average of the four directions to yield a single new direction. It is also
      not realistic to give the boids the ability to instantaneously change direction, so we
      include a sort of momentum factor that makes the boid partially continue along its
      previous path. Mathematically, this looks like

          vnew = µvold + (1 − µ)(wavoid vavoid + wcopy vcopy + wcenter vcenter + wview vview ),

      where all of the v terms are velocity vectors, all of the w terms are weighting factors,
      and µ is the momentum term. With the new composite velocity vector, we can add
      it to the old position to get the new position:

                                         pnew = pold + τ vnew ,

      where the p terms are positional vectors and τ specifies a step size or time increment.
         The weights for the rules can be varied to your liking, but I preferred something
      along the lines of
                                wavoid > wview > wcenter > wcopy ,
      which seems like a reasonable relationship between the four weights if we consider
      collision avoidance to be the most important rule for survival, and copying the least
      important. Moreover, the ordering seems to make sense temporally, in that when a
      boid needs to avoid an obstacle, it must act instantly, while staying with the rest
      of the flock is more of a long-term goal. But this is just my spin on things.
          Putting all of this together, we can now look at some examples of boids in
      motion. Figures 16.7 and 16.8 show two examples of boids in flight with the view
      rule disabled. In the first example we can see how a disorganized collection of boids
      will coalesce into a single flock. The figure really doesn’t do the process justice
      because what you can’t see in the figure are things like the boids jostling each other
      to get into the center of the flock, or how an isolated boid will all of a sudden spot
      a flock in the distance and zip across the screen to join the others.
          Watching the boids in flight is a fascinating exercise. I would be embarrassed
      to tell you just how long I played with the simulation in the process of writing this
      chapter. You should try the simulation yourself.
          Figure 16.8 shows another example of what happens when you change the
      “physics” of the boids’ universe in a strange manner. As you can see, the boids
      quickly form into two swarm-like structures with the boids orbiting each other in
      a cyclic manner. After a while, the smaller swarm on the left starts moving in an
      ever more eccentric manner because the boids in it periodically catch a glimpse of
      the larger swarm. Eventually, the smaller swarm becomes unstable and the boids
      leave it for the larger swarm. To coerce the boids into this type of behavior, I gave
274         Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization




      (a)             (b)                       (c)                       (d)




      (e)              (f)                      (g)                       (h)




                       Figure 16.7   A collection of boids self-organize to form a flock




      (a)             (b)                       (c)                       (d)




      (e)              (f)                      (g)                       (h)




               Figure 16.8   Changing the physics of the boids’ universe allows for boid cycles.
275         Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization




                  Figure 16.9   Activating the fourth boid rule promotes more realistic flocks


            the center and avoidance rules large weights, turned oﬀ the view rule, and reduced
            the copy rule to a very small weight.
               So far, all of these examples have been interesting, but the boids seem to behave
            more like fish or gnats than birds. This is where the view rule comes into play.
            Figure 16.9 shows the result of simulating the boids with all four rules activated.
            As you can see, the largest cluster of boids is actually in a “V” formation, which
            pleases me to no end. During the simulation, the boids can be seen to jostle each
            other as before, but now when one boid swerves in front of another, so as to cut it
            oﬀ, the oﬀended boid will swerve to clear its line of sight. This action frequently
            results in a chain reaction that is reminiscent of traﬃc congestion.


16.4 Unifying Themes
            In this chapter we have seen, firsthand, Kauﬀman’s “order for free” concept in the
            way Resnick’s randomly acting termites and Reynolds’s boids self-organize to form
            clusters and flocks. In each case, the agents were able to form a global structure
            that seemed to require some oversight. But in both cases all agents were concerned
            only about their own goals, which makes the resulting organization almost a happy
            side eﬀect. Langton’s ant again demonstrated how deceptively simple agents can
            be pathologically complicated and also revealed how multiple agents can synergize
            to create structures that no single agent could build. Since the individual agents of
            all of our collectives were recursive in their and their neighbors’ actions, and since
            each of the collectives consisted of many similar units acting in parallel, once again
            recursion and multiplicity reveal themselves as background themes.
276          Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization



                 You may have noticed another level of recursion that can be found in the boids.
             Let me explain; but first a warning. The term agent is one of those wonderful words
             that are so useful that many people will look at some phenomenon, point their fin-
             ger, and say, “It’s an agent.” As such, the term is often ambiguously used to mean
             many things, and I am about to reuse it again. One school of the artificial intel-
             ligence community, pioneered by Marvin Minsky and wonderfully described in his
             book Society of Mind , posits an agent to be a primitive behavioral mechanism that
             attempts to perform a simple act while simultaneously competing and cooperating
             with other agents. The society of agents refers to the whole collection. Minsky and
             others have convincingly argued that intelligence—even human intelligence—is an
             emergent property of the interactions of all of these behavioral agents.
                 With Reynolds’s boids, we can view each of the rules as an individual behavioral
             agent that competes and cooperates with the other rules to yield an emergent
             property that looks a lot like bird intelligence. Thus, the boids, as agents, are further
             composed of behavioral agents, which gives us another depth of recursion in how
             emergence and self-organization can come about. Minsky’s book contains examples
             of how a human’s behavioral agents can be composed of subagents, which can be
             composed of subsubagents, and so on. At the lowest level, the most primitive agents
             perform almost ridiculously simple tasks that no one would refer to as intelligent.
             But as one progresses to higher levels, the emergent composite behavior appears
             more and more complex, eventually hitting on something that is “intelligent.”
                 But this idea is not reductionism. Reductionism claims that the whole can be
             understood as the sum of the parts. In every case that we have seen, the whole has
             revealed itself to be a surprise in that it is decidedly more than the sum of the parts.
             At all levels of nature, recursion and multiplicity of agents promote emergence and
             self-organization to yield an almost unexplainable form of complexity.


16.5 Further Exploration
             All of the computer-generated figures in this chapter were made with termites,
             vants, and boids. Table 16.1 gives a brief summary of the options for all three
             programs. The options that are common to all three programs are listed first, and
             most of them have the same meaning as when they were used in the programs
             detailed earlier in this book. Probably the most important option for all of the
             programs is -num, which simply allows you to set the number of agents to use in a
             simulation.
                For the termites, there is only one other possible option, -dense, which is used
             to determine the density of the wood chips at the start of the simulation. You
             should give the option a value between 0 and 1.
                Similarly, vants has the same option, but in this case some random pixels are
             randomly set at the beginning of the simulation, which has the eﬀect of thwarting
277   Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization




            Option Name       Option Type       Option Meaning

            Options Common to All Three Programs
            -width         integer         width of the plot in pixels
            -height        integer         height of the plot in pixels
            -num           integer         number of agents to use
            -steps         integer         number of simulated steps
            -seed          integer         random seed
            -inv           switch          invert colors?
            -xmag          integer         magnification for X windows
            -term          string          how to plot points

            Options Only for termites
            -dense           double             density of chips at start

            Options Only for vants
            -rule            string             rule string
            -dense           double             density of random crud

            Options Only for boids
            -angle           double             number of viewing degrees
            -vangle          double             view avoidance angle
            -rcopy           double             radius for copy vector
            -rcent           double             radius for centroid vector
            -rvoid           double             radius for avoidance vector
            -rview           double             radius for view avoidance vector
            -wcopy           double             weight for copy vector
            -wcent           double             weight for centroid vector
            -wvoid           double             weight for avoidance vector
            -wview           double             weight for view avoidance vector
            -wrand           double             weight for random vector
            -dt              double             time-step increment
            -ddt             double             momentum term
            -minv            double             minimum velocity
            -len             integer            length of birds in pixels
            -psdump          switch             dump PostScript at the very end?


               Table 16.1   Command-line options for termites, vants, and boids
278         Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization



            orderly behavior in the virtual ants. The -rule option can be used to run a gener-
            alized virtual ant, and requires a value that is a string of any length that consists
            of only 0s and 1s.
                The boids program has many options, but most of them should be familiar by
            now. There are four options used to specify the radius in which the four boid rules
            are active, and four corresponding weighting factors. The -angle option is used to
            specify the number of viewing degrees that the boids possess. The boids can see
            only other boids that fall within a cone of the specified number of degrees in front
            of them. The -vangle option has a similar meaning, but is used only for the view
            rule. The -dt and -ddt options specify time increment and momentum factors, and
            -minv is used to specify the minimum speed that the boids can fly.
                For display purposes, -len can be used to specify the length of the boids in
            pixels. And finally, -psdump is used to tell the program to emit a PostScript image
            of the boids at the end of the simulation.
                A boid is displayed as a flying arrow. The head of the arrow defines an arc that
            swings from the left edge, to the front, and then to the right edge of the head. This
            arc is the same as the viewing angle; thus, if you set the viewing angle to something
            large, say 320 degrees, then the head will make a very sharp point. With a viewing
            angle of 180 degrees, the head will be a flat line.


16.6 Further Reading
             Dawkins, R. (1976). The selfish gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

             Holldobler, B. & Wilson, E. O. (1990). The ants. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap
             Press of Harvard University Press.

             Langton, C. (1986). Studying artificial life with cellular automata. Physica D,
             22(1–3): 120–149.

             Langton, C. G. (Ed.). (1989). Artificial Life, volume 6 of Santa Fe Institute studies
             in the sciences of complexity, Reading, Mass. Addison-Wesley.

             Langton, C. G., Taylor, C., Farmer, J. D., & Rasmussen, S. (Eds.). (1992). Artifi-
             cial Life II, volume 10 of Santa Fe Institute studies in the sciences of complexity,
             Reading, Mass. Addison-Wesley.

             Levy, S. (1992). Artificial life: A report from the frontier where computers meet
             biology. New York: Vintage Books.

             Minsky, M. (1987). The society of mind. London: Heinemann.

             Resnick, M. (1994). Turtles, termites, and traﬃc jams: Explorations in massively
             parallel microworlds. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
279   Autonomous Agents and Self-Organization



       Reynolds, C. W. (1987). Flocks, herds, and schools: A distributed behavioral
       model. Comp. Graph., 21(4): 25–34.
       Shaw, E. (1962). The schooling of fishes. Sci. Am., 206: 128–138.
       Stewart, I. (July 1994). Mathematical Recreations: The ultimate anty-particles.
       Sci. Am., 271(1): 104–107.
       Wilson, E. O. (1971). The insect societies. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of
       Harvard University Press.
17   Competition and Cooperation




                                        Do onto others as you would have them do onto you.
                                                                              — Luke 6:31


                                     Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
                                                                        — Deuteronomy 19:21


                                                Morality is the herd-instinct in the individual.
                                                                        — Friedrich Nietzsche




     A   lmost all trade—whether occurring in a stock market or in a bartering
     economy—depends on the simple fact that both traders believe that they are better
     oﬀ for making the trade. This fact includes favors as well. The simple principle
     of “You scratch my back, I’ll scratch yours,” as a behavioral guide, seems to be
     universally practiced by organelles, cells, plants and animals of all types, businesses,
     societies, and even nations.
         Consider symbiosis as an example. Lichen, as an organism, is hard to classify
     because it consists of bacteria and algae living in complete harmony. Many animals,
     including humans, coexist with symbiotic bacteria that assist in digestion. The
     higher animals are better oﬀ for the trade because it would be impossible for them to
     digest certain types of food otherwise. Similarly, bacteria get a quick and easy meal
     out of the exchange, leaving both parties better oﬀ for the partnership. Cooperation
     among members of the same and even diﬀering species also yields some striking
     examples. Slime molds demonstrate that conditional cooperation makes for a fuzzy
     boundary between single-celled and multicelled animals. During times of plenty,
     individual slime mold cells will fend for themselves; but when food is scarce, many
     slime mold cells will coalesce into a strange, multicellular creature that can crawl
     and even grow a stalk that emits spores. The higher animals provide more familiar
     examples. Some ant species are completely devoted to the task of defending a host
282         Competition and Cooperation



            plant from other animals. Mammals regularly groom one another, or form hunting
            packs. Specially adapted birds and fish clean other animals—even fierce predators
            such as sharks and crocodiles—without fear of being harmed in the process.
               Cooperation persists despite the fact that all living things are in a state of
            perpetual competition. For any of the examples listed above, it would be interesting
            to consider what would happen if one of the participants “cheated.” In the case
            of the symbiotes, cheating is not always a viable option because the successes of
            the symbiotes are often too closely intertwined. For example, there exist several
            ant species that defend plants from other predators. In return, the ants get a
            comfortable home with a built-in food supply. If the ants suddenly decided to no
            longer defend the plant from other animals, then the ants’ nice home would quickly
            cease to exist. However, the case of species that clean predators presents us with a
            sort of paradox in that it is not at all clear why crocodiles do not occasionally eat
            the birds that clean them. Would this not give them an edge over other crocodiles
            that are more restrained? And if so, shouldn’t we expect “cheaters” to benefit in
            the long run?
               Darwin’s theory of evolution, with it’s emphasis on “survival of the fittest,” seems
            to be at a loss to explain the emergence of mutual cooperation or “survival of the
            nicest.” In this chapter, we will forgo the question of how cooperation can evolve in
            a competitive environment (it will be postponed until Chapter 20) and will instead
            examine several prerequisites for the evolvability of cooperation. Specifically, we
            will see exactly why cooperation is so robust and why cooperation is stable in the
            sense that acts of cheating do not pay oﬀ in the long run. To do this, we will follow
            in the footsteps of Robert Axelrod, a political scientist, who used game theory to
            study how cooperation among selfish agents can be not only a viable strategy but
            a profitable one as well. The implications of this result are quite remarkable: Some
            forms of ethical behavior may be not only morally correct but pragmatic as well.


17.1 Game Theory and Zero-Sum Games
            The theory of games was created and formalized by John von Neumann and Oskar
            Morgenstern as a model of how thoughtful, rational, and potentially deceitful players
            with opposing interests will interact with each other. Under game theory, games
            such as chess and checkers are not “interesting” because for any board position
            there technically exists a “correct” or “best” move for a player to make, which
            leaves no room for real deceit. Moreover, chess and checkers are zero-sum games
            in that any gain made by a player yields an equal amount of loss for his opponent.
            We can therefore think of chess and checkers as transparent because given enough
            raw computing power, an opponent’s move will always be perfectly determined.
                An example of an “interesting” game for von Neumann and Morgenstern is
            poker. Poker is interesting not just because there is hidden information, but also
283   Competition and Cooperation



      because a player’s best strategy depends equally on the strategies employed by the
      other players. For instance, suppose a poker player based decisions on nothing other
      than probability theory. Such a player would consider the cards in her hand, any
      other visible cards, and the amount of money at stake, then compute an expected
      return for each possible action. Now, if this probability-using poker player bet an
      unusually large amount of money on a particular hand, every other player in the
      game would immediately know the relative strength of her cards, which is to say
      that probability theory alone is a bad strategy for poker. Good poker players will
      exaggerate, deceive, simulate irrationality, and attempt to confuse the other players.
      In other words, good poker players must inject a fair amount of pseudo-randomness
      into their strategies, employ subtle psychological mind games, and know something
      about probabilities in order to be eﬀective players.
          But because poker depends on knowing both probabilities and people, games
      in which players know everything except what the other players are going to do
      are especially interesting because they get to the essence of the “mind game” part
      of poker that makes it fun to play. The canonical example of such a game, and
      one that is familiar to most people, is a method used by parents to solve disputes
      between two children. Suppose there is a cake that two children want. Not only
      are the children reluctant to share with one another, but neither trusts the other to
      fairly take the first slice of cake. The mother of the children solves the problem by
      allowing one child to slice the cake and the other child to choose either of the two
      pieces. Since the first child can be certain that his sibling is going to take the larger
      piece,, the child will have no choice but to slice the cake into two equal pieces. Any
      attempt by the first child to slice the cake into unequal pieces to his benefit can only
      result in a suboptimal solution for him. The cake-slicing problem shows a nearly
      perfect example of the type of solution that game theory attempts to provide. We
      will shortly see how solutions to other games capture the same spirit as the solution
      to the cake-slicing problem.
          The primary goal of game theory is to provide a player with the best possible
      strategy for a particular game. In game theory, the term “strategy” refers not just
      to an overall plan but to a complete set of rules or an algorithm that prescribes
      exactly what a player should do in every possible situation and at any point in the
      game. By “best” I mean the strategy that yields the highest possible reward for
      a player. Sometimes a strategy will be as simple as “slice the cake as evenly as
      possible,” but strategies may also possess a dose of pseudo-randomness as well.
          To see an example of the latter type of strategy, consider a game between two
      players in which each player has a penny that he can place on a table. At each
      step in the game, the players can place their pennies with either side facing up;
      however, neither player knows ahead of time what the other player is going to do.
      After revealing their pennies to each other, if both pennies are heads or both are
      tails, then player A (the first player, if you wish) gets to keep both pennies; but if
284   Competition and Cooperation



                                                   Player B’s move
                                                   heads     tails
                                Player    heads     1, -1    -1, 1
                             A’s move      tails    -1, 1    1, -1


      Table 17.1 Payoﬀ matrix for an even, zero-sum, matching-pennies game: Payoﬀs are
      listed as A’s payoﬀ, B’s payoﬀ.


      the pennies have diﬀerent sides showing, then player B gets to keep both pennies.
      The rules for the game can be more succinctly described by a payoﬀ matrix , which
      is shown in Table 17.1. In the matrix, the entries describe each player’s net payoﬀ;
      hence, if each player plays heads, then player A wins one cent and player B loses
      one cent.
          With the underlying assumption that each player never knows what the other
      player is going to do, game theory tells us that the best strategy for any player is
      to randomly pick heads or tails with equal probability. This is known as a mixed
      strategy because it prescribes that in the absence of information, a player should
      mix things up by being random. It may seem strange that the best strategy is to
      act randomly; in fact, one may be tempted to try to predict what the other player is
      going to do; but if this is possible, then the second player could just as well attempt
      similar predictions, leading to an infinite cycle of players trying to outsmart one
      another. This illustrates the futility of trying to be too clever in this particular
      situation.
          The key to the solution of this game is threefold. First, we must assume that
      each player knows exactly what the other knows and that each will always act in
      his own self-interest. Second, any actions that are not random could be predicted,
      and therefore exploited by another player. Third, the best random mixed strategy
      will play heads and tails in a ratio that seeks a sort of middle ground like the one
      in the cake-slicing problem, that is, no one “won” the cake-slicing problem, in that
      the best solution was to avoid losing by doing something suboptimal or stupid.
          We will now dive into the mathematical details of the solution. We need only
      some basic algebra to appreciate the mathematics; but if you find yourself lost
      in the details, it should be helpful to know that the math simply states that the
      matching-pennies game is a lot like the cake-slicing problem.
          To start, let’s get some notation out of the way. We will refer to the probability
      that player A will play heads as PA (heads). Similarly, PB (heads) is equal to
      the same probability for player B. We could also define similar terms for the
      probability that a player will play tails, but they are not really necessary because
      PA (tails) = (1 − PA (heads)) and PB (tails) = (1 − PB (heads)). We are now
      going to write down a mathematical expression that describes the expected score
285   Competition and Cooperation




                                         1       Player A’s expected score




                                         0




                                         -1



                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5        PB(heads)
                                             0                                                    0.5                                                          1       0
                                                                                              PA(heads)




      Figure 17.1 Plotting player A’s expected score as a function of PA (heads) and
      PB (heads) results in a surface with a quarter-twist
                                                                                                              PB(heads) = 0.5
                                                                                               1




                                                                  Player A’s expected score
                                                                                               0




                                                                                              -1
                                                                                                   0                0.5                                            1
                                                                                                                PA(heads)

                                                                                                                  (b)
                                                      PB(heads) = 0.25                                                                                                     PB(heads) = 0.75
                                        1                                                                                                             1




            Player A’s expected score                                                                                     Player A’s expected score
                                        0                                                                                                             0




                                        -1                                                                                                            -1
                                             0              0.5                                           1                                                0                     0.5                      1
                                                         PA(heads)                                                                                                            PA(heads)

                                                           (a)                                                                                                                  (c)


      Figure 17.2 Cross sections of the surface from Figure 17.1 with PB (heads) fixed at (a)
      1
      4
        , (b) 12 , and (c) 34
286   Competition and Cooperation



      for player A, given the two probabilities described above:

               Expected score for A =       PA (heads) × PB (heads) −
                                            PA (heads) × (1 − PB (heads)) −
                                            (1 − PA (heads)) × PB (heads) +
                                            (1 − PA (heads)) × (1 − PB (heads)).

          The four subexpressions in the equation correspond to the four possible combi-
      nations of the two players playing either heads or tails. The first and last subex-
      pressions are positive because they correspond to a win for player A, while the
      second and third subexpressions are negative because they correspond to a loss for
      player A. To write the corresponding equations for player B, we would only need to
      negate the whole equation, since a win for B is a loss for A (this being a zero-sum
      game).
          With this equation, we can compute the eﬀectiveness of a mixed strategy that
      player A could use against strategies employed by player B. Since the equation has
      only two free variables, we can also draw a surface plot of the function, which is
      shown in Figure 17.1. The surface plot has some interesting properties that are a
      little diﬃcult to see on a flat page, so it may help you to imagine that the surface
      plot is a flat sheet of rubber that you are holding in your hands, one edge in your
      left hand and the other in your right hand. If you were to twist the two edges in
      opposite directions, you would end up with a surface not unlike that of Figure 17.1.
      This type of surface is known as a saddle because it topologically resembles a real
      saddle. To see this, follow the line defined by PA (heads) = PB (heads). The cross
      section of the surface at this line is valley-shaped. As you follow the line defined
      by PA (heads) = (1 − PB (heads)), the surface has a cross section with a peak.
      Therefore, the surface has a saddle point directly in its center that is simultaneously
      at the top of a hill and at the bottom of a valley.
          In this case, it is the saddle point that makes the matching-pennies game have
      a single solution. How so? Let’s suppose for the moment that player B is going to
      play heads with probability 41 . Figure 17.2a shows the cross section of the saddle
      along the line defined by PB (heads) = 41 . The graph in Figure 17.2a shows that
      player A can tilt the game in his favor by playing with PA (heads) very small. In
      fact, if player B always uses PB (heads) = 41 , then player A can always play tails,
      which gives him an expected profit of a half-cent per game. Moreover, if player B
      fixes PB (heads) to be less than 21 , then player A can always exploit the situation
      to his favor. The same argument can be made for player B using a large value
      for PB (heads) (whose cross section is shown in Figure 17.2c). For player B to
      fix PB (heads) to a large or a small value is similar in spirit to a child who cuts a
      cake unequally. Any diﬀerence in any direction can be exploited by the other player.
      The only solution that enables no exploitation whatsoever is for both players to play
      heads and tails with equal probability. Figure 17.2b shows the cross section of the
287   Competition and Cooperation



                                                   Player B’s move
                                                  heads        tails
                              Player   heads    HH, -HH HT , -HT
                           A’s move     tails   T H, -T H    T T , -T T


      Table 17.2 Payoﬀ matrices for a generalized, zero-sum matching-pennies game: Payoﬀs
      are listed as A’s payoﬀ, B’s payoﬀ.



      saddle at PB (heads) = 12 , which is merely a flat line. The flat line indicates that
      player B has done the best one can hope for by simply eliminating the opportunity
      for player A to win. But Player A has the same information as player B, so we can
      expect both players to use the same analysis.
          The preceding arguments were illustrative for an evenly matched game, but they
      were really only an introduction to a more general result. For any two-player finite
      game—even games that are skewed to be in the favor of one player—there exists at
      least one point that corresponds to two stable strategies for the players. By “stable”
      I mean that neither player could do better with any other strategy. This saddle
      point is known as a Nash equilibrium, named after its discoverer, John Nash.
          Looking at Table 17.2, which contains a generalized version of the matching-
      pennies game, we can rewrite the expected score for player A as

                    E(A)    =   HH × PA (heads) × PB (heads) +
                                HT × PA (heads) × (1 − PB (heads)) +
                                T H × (1 − PA (heads)) × PB (heads) +
                                T T × (1 − PA (heads)) × (1 − PB (heads)),

      where the HH, HT , T H, and T T terms correspond to the four possible payoﬀs for
      player A, and the notation E(A) stands for the expected earnings of player A. This
      equation will always have at least one Nash equilibrium, which means that a “best”
      strategy can be computed by looking for flat spots in the surface plot. (Such spots,
      mathematically speaking, will have a zero gradient.)
          The remarkable fact about these solutions is that they will employ randomness
      in such a way that they cannot be outsmarted—neither in theory nor in practice—
      by a person or a computer. With such a powerful result, many game theorists have
      had the hope of modeling many other types of conflicts as multiplayer games. Some
      of these attempts have been very fruitful. It is also fair to say that game theory
      has resulted in a powerful way of looking at conflict in all conceivable areas, from
      economics, to politics, and even to biology. But it is game theory’s failures that are
      even more telling.
288         Competition and Cooperation



17.2 Nonzero-Sum Games and Dilemmas
            When we started this chapter, I began with the argument that cooperation in
            nature is more common than one would expect given the winner-take-all emphasis
            of Darwin’s natural selection. In the last section, we were able to look at a toy
            game that had little resemblance to real-life scenarios but helped to explain the
            ideas behind game theory. In the matching-pennies game, there was no room for
            cooperation because the game was zero-sum; however, in this section we will look
            at games that are nonzero-sum, leaving open the possibility of cooperation among
            players. Moreover, nonzero-sum games permit win-win and lose-lose outcomes,
            which adds a nice dose of realism to the examples.
                As a real-world example, consider a basic social dilemma. In most workplaces
            people share a communal coﬀee maker with the implicit (or sometimes explicit)
            rule that if you take the last cup of coﬀee from the pot, then you should make
            the next pot. Nevertheless, some people can’t resist the temptation to take the
            last cup without making a new pot, thus leaving a thin layer of sludge for the next
            coﬀee drinker. Are such people sociopaths?1 Or are such people merely exploitative
            because they can get away with it? The dilemma in this situation lies in the conflict:
            Be a good colleague, or a caﬀeine junky?
                While this situation serves as an example of a social dilemma, it is a little
            too vague to be studied by game theory, primarily because there are an indefinite
            number of players playing for an indefinite length of time. Nevertheless, for the
            remainder of this section, we will use the communal coﬀee scenario as a metaphor
            because of its familiarity, and with the understanding that the games we will for-
            mally consider will only have two players who play for a single round. Thus, there
            is no chance of retribution or punishment in any of the games, in that a player
            will never encounter an opponent again. The goal of any player will always be to
            maximize her payoﬀ and not to live up to some moral standard. These are games,
            after all, and players play to win. Hence, the communal coﬀee scenario does not
            meet these requirements, since colleagues can in some way punish each other for
            antisocial behavior, but it will still be useful as a basic example of the components
            of a dilemma.
                With those caveats aside, we can now consider some formal properties of games
            that result in dilemmas. The usual meaning of a dilemma is summed up by the
            phrase “damned if you do, damned if you don’t.” For the purpose of this section I
            am going to use a slightly diﬀerent definition that boils down to the notion that no
            matter what choice a player makes there exists the possibility that a player may feel
            regret after a single round of play. Also, by “regret” I do not mean that a player
            feels morally regretful, but that given the possibility, a player would act diﬀerently.2
               1 Okay, maybe I should switch to decaf.
               2 The literature on game theory often contains a similar notion of regret; however, my use of

            the word also includes the idea that a player has a sense of irony. This will make more sense when
            we look at why the Prisoner’s Dilemma can be considered a dilemma.
289          Competition and Cooperation



                                                       Player B’s move

                                           cooperate                    defect
                                            (CC, CC)                  (CD, DC)
                        cooperate           Reward for            Sucker’s payoﬀ, and
         Player
                                        mutual cooperation        Temptation to defect
      A’s move
                                            (DC, CD)                  (DD, DD)
                          defect       Temptation to defect,        Punishment for
                                        and Sucker’s payoﬀ          mutual defection


             Table 17.3 Payoﬀs for a generic two-player dilemma: Payoﬀs are listed in parentheses
             as (A’s payoﬀ, B’s payoﬀ).


                 In order to see what sorts of dilemmas are possible, consider Table 17.3, which
             shows a payoﬀ matrix for a two-player game in which there are four possible payoﬀs.
             In this game, each player must take one of two actions, cooperate or defect; and, as
             with the matching-pennies game, neither player knows ahead of time what the other
             player is going to do. For this section we will denote the payoﬀs as CC, CD, DC,
             and DD, which correspond to the four possible combinations of cooperation and
             defection. Each of the four possible payoﬀs could have a numerical value assigned
             to it; however, instead of assigning numbers to the specific entries, we will enforce
             an ordering on the payoﬀs that merely states which payoﬀs are preferable when
             compared with the others. Using the communal coﬀee scenario as an example, a
             reasonable ordering of the payoﬀs could be:

                  1. You get to drink all the coﬀee you want without ever brewing a pot (DC).

                  2. You get to drink coﬀee while making your fair share for others (CC).

                  3. You get to drink coﬀee but everyone else exploits you (CD).

                  4. No one makes coﬀees, so no one can drink coﬀee (DD).

             This ordering simply encodes the idea that you like to drink coﬀee, but you would
             rather not have to make it yourself. It is also just one of many orderings that are
             possible for a two-player game of this type. With four diﬀerent payoﬀs, there are
             exactly twenty-four diﬀerent orderings. Of these twenty-four, most of the games
             have a trivial solution; for instance, when CC > CD > DC > DD, there is no
             dilemma because both you and your opponent always do better when either or
             both of you cooperate. In order for a dilemma to exist, players must have a possible
             reason for both cooperating and defecting. In this spirit, we will describe some
             conditions on the ordering that must be true in order for a dilemma to occur.
290   Competition and Cooperation



         This first two conditions assume that you take one course of action, and then
      specify what you would prefer your opponent’s action to be:
          • (CC > CD) This condition simply states that if you cooperate, then you
            will benefit more if the other player also cooperates, for instance, you would
            prefer that all players periodically make a fresh pot of coﬀee instead of just
            your being the only one who makes coﬀee.
          • (DC > DD) This condition means that if you defect, you get an additional
            bonus if the other player cooperates, for example, it is better for you to get
            your coﬀee through the other player’s eﬀorts than to have no coﬀee at all.
      Together, in a nutshell, the first two constraints state that no matter what you do,
      you prefer that the other player cooperates.
          The next two constraints explain things from a reversed point of view: They
      assume that the other player will take some course of action and then specify an
      ordering that is determined by your action. However, it is not necessary that both
      of these conditions be true, only that one or the other is:
          • (DC > CC) This condition states that if the other player cooperates, then
            you are better oﬀ defecting, for instance, if someone else makes a pot of coﬀee,
            then enjoy the java.
          • (DD > CD) This condition states that if the other player defects, then you
            are better oﬀ defecting. For the communal coﬀee scenario, this condition is
            not met, but (DC > CC) is true, which still gives us a dilemma. We will see
            another dilemma that meets this requirement shortly.
      The third and fourth rules together motivate players to defect. So considering all
      four conditions together, they express the idea that each player wants the other to
      cooperate, but both are tempted to defect. I am going to add a fifth condition of
      (CC > DD), which simply states that mutual cooperation is preferred to mutual
      defection.3 Putting all of this together, we can logically express the conditions for
      a game to be a dilemma as:

          (CC > CD) ∧ (DC > DD) ∧ ((DC > CC) ∨ (DD > CD)) ∧ (CC > DD),

      where ∧ represents the logical AND operation and ∨ represents the logical OR
      operation. (You may want to consult this logical statement later on to convince
      yourself that it in fact does describe the dilemmas that we will be considering
      shortly.) Of the twenty-four possible two-player games, this leaves only three games
      that can be properly referred to as dilemmas. Each has been thoroughly studied
          3 Actually, there is a game known as Deadlock that has (DD > CC) and is sometimes considered

      a dilemma by game theorists. In Deadlock, players really have no incentive to cooperate; hence,
      it really isn’t much of a dilemma.
291   Competition and Cooperation



      by game theorists and has a common name: Chicken, Stag Hunt, and Prisoner’s
      Dilemma. We will examine each dilemma in detail, saving the Prisoner’s Dilemma
      for last, since for our purposes it is the most important of the three dilemmas.


      Chicken (DC > CC > CD > DD) The prototypical version of the Chicken
      Dilemma, featured in films such as Rebel Without a Cause, works as follows. Two
      confused and maladjusted teenagers face each other in separate cars that are initially
      placed on opposite ends of a straight road. At an agreed-upon starting time, both
      players accelerate their cars, heading on a collision course. If one player unilaterally
      swerves his car to avoid a collision (i.e., cooperate), he is labeled a “chicken,” while
      his opponent can make a claim to studliness. If both players swerve, then neither
      player wins or loses much in the way of reputation. But if both players stay their
      course (i.e., defect), then they die, which is clearly the worst possible outcome.
          The Chicken Dilemma superficially has nothing in common with our communal
      coﬀee scenario, but the ordering of the payoﬀs is identical in the two. Other variants
      of the game can be found wherever social status can be achieved through dominance:
      playgrounds, animal pecking orders, and international politics (e.g., the Cuban
      missile crisis).
          Regret in the Chicken Dilemma has two potential sources. If both you and your
      opponent cooperate, then you would have been better oﬀ defecting. On the other
      hand, if both players defect, you would have been better oﬀ cooperating. Thus,
      “damned if you do, damned if you don’t” is an accurate description of the Chicken
      Dilemma. Note that the optimal move for any player is to do exactly what the
      other player doesn’t do.


      Stag Hunt (CC > DC > DD > CD) Stag Hunt is normally explained as a game
      in which players must choose to hunt either stag or hare. Since most people are
      not frequent stag hunters (and since most people don’t use words like “stag” and
      “hare”), I have an alternative version of the Stag Hunt Dilemma that should be
      a little more familiar to most.4 My version of the Stag Hunt Dilemma is actually
      a real dilemma that I personally contend with about once a week in the summer.
      Suppose you play in a softball league with several colleagues. When everyone shows
      up for a game, your team usually does well; but when only a few of the key players
      show up, your team will typically get slaughtered. You like to play softball, and
      you especially like to win, but losing takes its toll on your competitive spirit. What
      do I do? Typically I play.
         4 In the original version, you and another are hunting stag, which means that each player must

      guard one end of a trail so as to trap the stag in the middle. Prior to catching the stag, both you
      and your partner will each come across a hare. If either of you goes after the hare, then the stag
      will get away, but the one who defects will have the hare to eat. Both players would rather eat
      stag, but both are tempted to defect because the other may do so.
292   Competition and Cooperation



          Regret in the Stag Hunt Dilemma is diﬀerent than it was in Chicken, since any
      player’s optimal move is to do the same thing that the other players do. If others
      play, so should you. If others don’t play, you shouldn’t either. Hence, our situation
      is exactly the opposite of the one we had in Chicken.

      Prisoner’s Dilemma (DC > CC > DD > CD) In the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
      you and a partner in crime have been arrested for a crime that you are actually
      guilty of, but the prosecutor has too little evidence to win a conviction. You and
      your partner are being interrogated separately, but you have a good idea that he
      is being squeezed in a manner that is similar to your own predicament. Here is
      the situation: If both of you keep your mouths shut (i.e., you cooperate with each
      other), then both of you will get away with the crime. If one of you turns state’s
      evidence (defect), then the other will be put in prison while the defector gets to live
      a life of luxury on the state payroll as a protected witness. If both of you confess
      and turn state’s evidence (defect), then both of you will go to prison, but with a
      reduced sentence.
          What do you do? The diabolical twist in the Prisoner’s Dilemma is that no
      matter what your opponent (or partner) does, you are better oﬀ defecting. In fact,
      according to game theory, Prisoner’s Dilemma isn’t much of a dilemma because it
      has the clear-cut solution that you should always defect. The perversity of this
      situation is that if we are to assume that both players have this knowledge, then
      they will both defect, resulting in an outcome that is far worse than if they had
      both cooperated! Thus, the common good is subverted by individual rationality.
          The Prisoner’s Dilemma is reminiscent of economic trade wars. Every nation
      wants other countries to lower trade barriers, but no nations want to lower all
      of their own because they believe they have industries that need to be protected
      (especially interesting cases of this are Japan’s near refusal to import rice, and
      France’s strict conditions for the importation of movies). Regret in the Prisoner’s
      dilemma comes from an appreciation of irony.

         The Prisoner’s Dilemma, as a game, was discovered by Melvin Dresher and
      Merrill Flood in 1950 while they were working at the RAND Corporation. Robert
      Axelrod has termed the Prisoner’s Dilemma the E. coli of social psychology, since it
      nicely encompasses the most basic features of social conflict. Axelrod’s statement is
      especially justified because Chicken and Stag Hunt (as well as Deadlock, mentioned
      earlier in this chapter in footnote 3) can be seen as slight variations of the Pris-
      oner’s Dilemma. For instance, if we take the ordering from the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
      DC > CC > DD > CD, and swap the first two payoﬀs, we end up with Stag
      Hunt. Similarly, swapping the last two payoﬀs turns the Prisoner’s Dilemma into
      Chicken. (Likewise, swapping the middle two payoﬀs retrieves Deadlock.) Hence,
      the Prisoner’s Dilemma acts as a prototypical dilemma from which all of the others
      are derived.
293          Competition and Cooperation



                You may have a bit of skepticism at this point regarding the relevance of the
             Prisoner’s Dilemma to real-world scenarios; after all, game theory states that ratio-
             nal players should always defect when faced with the Prisoner’s Dilemma. Clearly,
             the Prisoner’s Dilemma is lacking some crucial quality that real-world situations
             have, but what is it? In the next section, we will see how simply allowing players to
             play the Prisoner’s Dilemma for an indeterminate number of rounds allows “nice”
             strategies to be successful.


17.3 Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma
             The iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma, or IPD for short, is identical to the original version
             of the game except for the fact that players play for many rounds instead of a
             single round. Moreover, players have complete knowledge of their own and their
             competitor’s previous moves; thus, one can make decisions based upon whether or
             not one’s opponent has been cooperative or not. As we shall see, iteration makes
             all the diﬀerence.
                 In 1980, Robert Axelrod solicited entries for a round-robin tournament in which
             programs would play the IPD for 200 rounds. In order to keep score so as to
             determine a winner, Axelrod assigned numerical values5 to each of the four possible
             outcomes: five points for the “temptation” payoﬀ (DC = 5), three points for mutual
             cooperation (CC = 3), one point as punishment for mutual defection (DD = 1),
             and no points as the sucker’s payoﬀ (CD = 0). Since each program played every
             other program as well as a copy of itself, the winner was the program that earned the
             most points. Some of the participants in the study included game theorists, social
             scientists, mathematicians, and computer scientists; thus, the submitted programs
             came from a learned crowd that understood a thing or two about game theory and
             social conflict. As to the actual programs, there were many diﬀerent types. Some
             of the programs could be described as nice, greedy, sophisticated, simple, stupid, or
             even devious. The surprising outcome of this tournament is that the simplest and
             shortest of all of the programs won. But before we examine the winner, let’s take a
             look at some simple but unrealistic strategies:

                • Always Defect (“ALL-D”). This is perhaps the safest strategy, in that it
                  is impossible to win against it. Moreover, it is impossible to exploit ALL-
                  D because it will never leave itself open to attack. ALL-D has the added
                  strength that it can endlessly exploit strategies that are endlessly forgiving,
                  yielding the highest possible payoﬀ, but will suﬀer when playing against itself
                  or unforgiving strategies.
                5 Any numerical values assigned to the payoﬀs of the Prisoner’s Dilemma should obey the

             relationship (DC + CD) < (2 × CC). Otherwise, in the IPD, players could take turns being the
             “sucker” for a total return greater than that from mutual cooperation.
294   Competition and Cooperation



                                ALL-C      RAND       ALL-D       Average
                     ALL-C       3.0        1.5        0.0        1.5
                     RAND        4.0        2.0        0.5        2.166̄
                     ALL-D       5.0        3.0        1.0        3.0


      Table 17.4 The expected score of the column-one strategy when played against the
      row-one strategy


         • Always Cooperate (“ALL-C”). This strategy, being the exact opposite of
           ALL-D, does well when it plays itself or other “nice” strategies, but is end-
           lessly exploited by the likes of ALL-D.
         • Randomly Cooperate or Defect (“RAND”). By randomly switching between
           cooperation and defection, RAND achieves a sort of middle ground when
           compared with the other two strategies, since it is more resistant to the ex-
           ploitation of ALL-D, can occasionally exploit ALL-C, and does fairly well
           when played against itself.
          Table 17.4 describes how each of the three basic strategies would fare when
      played in a simple round-robin tournament. As can be seen, not only does ALL-
      D do best, but its average score is equal to the best score that ALL-C can ever
      achieve, which seems to imply that ALL-D may still be a pretty good approach after
      all. The problem with ALL-D, however, is that if every creature in a population
      practiced a strategy that amounted to ALL-D, then the population as a whole
      would have a very low fitness because every individual in the population would
      be constantly in a state of struggle. By comparison, a population that consisted
      entirely of ALL-C would have a relatively high fitness because everyone would be
      cooperating. Hence, ALL-D optimizes local fitness at the expense of global fitness
      while ALL-C optimizes global fitness at the expense of local fitness. Both strategies
      are bad for exactly opposite reasons. RAND, being a sort of stochastic merging of
      ALL-C and ALL-D, yields a compromise that most would find unsatisfying for a
      variety of reasons. How, then, should individuals and entire populations behave so
      that local and global fitness are both given a chance to flourish?
          The major weakness with all of these simple strategies is that they lack the most
      basic notion of memory, in that they do what they do regardless of what has pre-
      viously occurred. What is obviously missing is that strategies may depend on both
      players’ previous actions. Enter Anatol Rapoport and his entry in the tournament,
      “Tit-for-Tat,” or TFT. Of the fourteen programs submitted to Axelrod’s tourna-
      ment, Rapoport’s was the shortest, a mere four lines of code. The principle behind
      TFT is amazingly simple but universally recognizable: Be nice at first, but punish
      any defections. In other words, TFT will oﬀer to cooperate in the first round of any
      game of IPD, then it will do exactly what its opponent did in the previous round.
295          Competition and Cooperation



             Hence, TFT is indistinguishable from ALL-C when played against ALL-C, and
             when played against ALL-D, TFT will get suckered on the first round but will
             reciprocate with defection for the remainder of the game. TFT also seems to nicely
             combine the two notions from the biblical quotes that appear in the beginning of
             this chapter.
                 TFT won the first round of Axelrod’s tournament by being cooperative but re-
             sistant to exploitation. Encouraged by these results, Axelrod held a second round
             that drew many more entries (sixty-two) from six diﬀerent countries. The par-
             ticipants now included hobbyists as well as academics. Yet, the most significant
             diﬀerence between the first and second rounds of the tournament was that in the
             second round all participants knew that TFT was the winner, and could therefore
             use the findings and analysis from the first round to better their chance of winning.
             Once again Anatol Rapoport entered TFT, and once again TFT won. This is
             especially impressive when you consider that all participants in the second round
             were motivated to specifically beat TFT . In the next section, we will look at some
             of Axelrod’s analysis, which indicates why TFT is such a strong strategy.


17.4 Stable Strategies and Other Considerations
             Despite TFT’s victories in both of Axelrod’s tournament rounds, it is important
             to realize that there is no such thing as a “best” strategy for IPD. If most of your
             opponents consist of nice, ALL-C-like strategies, then it pays to be selfish; but if
             most of your opponents have a retaliatory streak in them, then it’s better to keep
             your greed in check. TFT’s strength lies in the fact that it works in a wide variety
             of settings. Axelrod thoroughly analyzed the results from his tournament and was
             able to generalize what characteristics make strategies successful:
                • Don’t be envious. The most amazing fact about TFT’s victory is that TFT
                  can never beat another strategy. At best, it can only tie. TFT seeks win-win
                  situations because it doesn’t get greedy for higher payoﬀs.
                • Be nice. In the second round of Axelrod’s tournament, some attempted to
                  emulate TFT except that they would try to sneak in an occasional defection
                  in order increase their net payoﬀ. “Niceness,” that is, never being the first
                  to defect, was the single best predictor of success. “Mean” strategies almost
                  always did more poorly than the nice strategies.
                • Reciprocate. TFT elicits cooperation because it punishes defection and re-
                  wards cooperation. In fact, on a basic level, TFT is forgiving because it will
                  resume cooperation if an opponent does so.
                • Don’t be too clever. Part of the elegance of TFT is that it is perfectly trans-
                  parent. Once you know what TFT’s strategy is, it is fairly clear that there
                  is no way to beat it. Other, more complicated strategies may attempt to
296   Competition and Cooperation



            be more sophisticated, but after a while, “sophistication” can look a lot like
            randomness. Moreover, complicated strategies can be endlessly subjected to
            feedback conditions because, if they are successful, they will most likely en-
            counter strategies with a similar underlying algorithm.

          As stated before, there is no such thing as a best strategy, and TFT has some
      known problems. Some have claimed that TFT is too eager to punish. In fact,
      a strategy known as “Tit-for-Two-Tats,” which waits for two defections before ad-
      ministering punishment, would have won the first tournament round but did rel-
      atively poorly in the second round. Nevertheless, “Tit-for-Two-Tats” does better
      than TFT in a noisy environment. For example, if by mistake a defection occurs
      between two strategies using TFT, the two players will endlessly echo the error,
      each alternating between cooperation and defection. But “Tit-for-Two-Tats,” being
      more forgiving, will shrug oﬀ an erroneous defection. Nevertheless, “Tit-for-Two-
      Tats” can be exploited by “Joss,” a strategy that behaves like TFT but will defect
      randomly 10 percent of the time.
          An example of a less forgiving TFT-like strategy is “Friedman,” which starts oﬀ
      with cooperation but will forever defect after the first defection by an opponent. Of
      all the “nice” strategies, “Friedman” did the worst because of its unforgiving nature.
      Yet “Friedman” has the aﬀect of making “Joss” a very impractical strategy, since
      one defection is enough to trigger an all-out war with “Friedman.”
          The moral of all of this is that you can never know what your environment will
      look like; thus, on a certain level, it is advantageous to be a generalist. Moreover,
      regardless of the system or substrate (economies, ecosystems, or computers), it is
      a fair bet that successful strategies will be emulated by others, which means that
      hypocrisy is an especially bad thing. In fact, we can almost conclude that any
      successful strategy must, by definition, be able to get along with itself. But this
      raises an interesting question: What qualities must a strategy have in order to
      plausibly be found in nature?
          Axelrod and William Hamilton considered this question from a biological per-
      spective and came up with three basic requirements. First, a strategy must be
      initially viable. Clearly, simple strategies such as ALL-D and ALL-C qualify be-
      cause it is easy to imagine that a genetic program for such behavior can exist. TFT,
      being only slightly more complicated, has the same benefit of simplicity. Moreover,
      from a programming point of view, TFT requires the underlying “computer” to
      remember only a single bit of information, that is, you are currently in either a
      cooperative relationship or an uncooperative one. The simplest animals can and do
      practice this sort of behavior, even if it is in the form of “fight or flight” or “fight
      or ignore.”
          Successful strategies must also be robust, in that they can exist in a wide variety
      of environments. Both “mean” and “nice” strategies do well only when surrounded
      almost exclusively by nice strategies. In a varied environment, both of the extreme
      strategies will do poorly. But TFT is able to cope with almost any environment.
297          Competition and Cooperation



                Finally, successful strategies must be resistant to invasions from mutated strate-
             gies. This characteristic is similar to the notion of an evolutionary stable strategy
             (ESS), a term that John Maynard Smith used in the 1960s when he used game
             theory to describe evolutionary systems. An ESS is almost identical to a Nash
             equilibrium from game theory, in that an ESS is in a Nash equilibrium with itself.
             What all of this means is that stable strategies can fight oﬀ invaders. A population
             of ALL-D is in one sense the most stable strategy because no single mutation could
             survive in such a kill-or-be-killed environment. Any deviation from ALL-D will be
             punished. Therefore, ALL-D is an ESS. An example of a very unrobust strategy
             is ALL-C, which can be successfully invaded by any other strategy. TFT can be
             stable, but is ironically susceptible to being invaded by ALL-C, which can exist in
             a mostly TFT population of protectors.


17.5 Ecological and Spatial Worlds

             We have seen how the success of a strategy closely depends on the environment in
             which it exists. In this section we will examine how the reverse process can take
             place, that is, how a successful strategy can aﬀect its environment. The study of the
             relationships and interactions that occur between organisms and environments is the
             science of ecology. Throughout this section we will consider the iterative Prisoner’s
             Dilemma as seen through the eyes of an ecologist. Doing so is interesting for many
             reasons, one of which, as Axelrod has pointed out, is that ecological simulations
             of the iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma yield insights into what future rounds of IPD
             tournaments would look like. More specifically, the second round of Axelrod’s
             tournament reflected the failures and successes of the first round, in that the greater
             a strategy’s score, the more likely it was to be emulated in a later round by other
             participants. Similarly, successful organisms in an ecosystem will increase their
             numbers and, therefore, change their environment.
                 The ecological model that we will use is identical to one used by Axelrod and is
             very simple mathematically. We assume that the ecosystem can support only a fixed
             number of “organisms” and that the population of each strategy is some fractional
             part of the whole ecosystem. For convenience, let the proportional populations of
             the strategies be represented by numbers between 0 and 1 so that the sum of the
             proportional populations of all strategies is equal to 1. With this representation,
             the populations reflect the probability that a randomly selected member of the
             ecosystem will obey a particular strategy. Also note that a population proportion
             of 0 means that a strategy is extinct and that a population proportion of 1 means
             that the environment is completely saturated with a particular strategy.
                 The dynamics of our ecological model can be mathematically described in terms
             of two time-varying quantities that we recompute at each time step, and a special
             lookup table that can be precomputed once for the whole simulation. The two
298   Competition and Cooperation



       Cooperation and Defection in Nature                                       Digression 17.1

        While there are many examples of interspecies cooperation in nature, there are also
        some related examples of “defections” that illustrate some of the game-theoretic as-
        pects of biology. One particular case of cooperation and defection can be found in
        fish.

        A wrasse is a small fish that earns a living eating parasites oﬀ larger fish. The larger
        fish not only refrain from eating wrasse, but they also have been known to wait at
        an established station for the privilege of being cleaned. Normally this transaction
        proceeds with little surprise; the wrasse gets a meal and the larger fish gets cleaned.

        Things are complicated, however, by another small fish, called a blenny, that not only
        looks like a wrasse but has adapted to mimic one as well. The blenny will approach a
        larger fish as if it is going to clean it, but instead it will take a bite of the larger fish’s
        tail fin. Thus, nature has a form of defection that is much more subtle than the usual
        predator-prey type of competition. Moreover, the blenny is partially a victim of its
        own success, since if its population ever significantly exceeds the wrasse’s, it will be
        more diﬃcult for it to dupe the larger fish (Wickler, 1968).




      time-varying quantities are the proportional populations and the scores, which we
      will denote by Pi (t) and Si (t) where the i subscript denotes strategy i and t denotes
      the time step. The lookup table, Rij (t), stores the relative score that strategy i
      would win when played against strategy j. The numbers in the lookup table are
      computed in a manner similar to the way we calculated the values in Table 17.4,
      except that in this case we have to consider the number of rounds6 that the IPD
      will be played in a given time step. Also notice that I have given the lookup table a
      time index to indicate that the simulation I wrote for this chapter recomputes the
      table at each time step for reasons that will be explained shortly.
         The proportional population of a strategy at the next time step is updated by
      the equation
                                                  Pi (t) × Si (t)
                                 Pi (t + 1) = 4n                     ,
                                                 j=1 Pj (t) × Sj (t)

      where n represents the total number of strategies in the ecosystem. The numerator
      of the update equation reflects the fact that the next population level is proportional
      to the current population times the score. Hence, the greater the current popula-
      tion or the greater the current score, the greater the next population level. The
         6 A single ecological simulation consists of many time steps. In each time step, we play many

      rounds of the Prisoner’s Dilemma. This should clarify any remaining ambiguity in how “rounds”
      and “steps” are used in the discussion.
299   Competition and Cooperation



      denominator of the equation is a normalization term that enforces the constraint
      that the sum of all of the proportional populations must be equal to 1. A strategy’s
      score at a given time step is computed by the equation
                                               n
                                               !
                                    Si (t) =         Pk (t) × Rik (t),
                                               k=1

      which expresses the idea that the total score is equal to a weighted sum of how the
      strategy performs against all of the other strategies. In this case, we are weighting
      the total by the population levels of the strategies; thus, the greater the population
      of a particular opponent, the more the score against that opponent will count.
          The only remaining things we must specify are the payoﬀ matrix, the number
      of rounds for each step, and the initial populations. For our first example of how
      an ecosystem can change over time, we will have ALL-C, ALL-D, RAND, and
      TFT fight it out. We will use the same payoﬀ matrix that Axelrod used (DC = 5,
      CC = 3, DD = 1, and CD = 0) and have each time step consist of 200 rounds. At
      the very first time step we will set ALL-C to occupy 60 percent of the population,
      RAND to 20 percent, and ALL-D and TFT to 10 percent each.
          Figure 17.3a shows the population levels of the four strategies over fifty time
      steps. Right from the start, ALL-C suﬀers by being exploited by ALL-D and
      RAND, which both see an initial boost in their populations, while TFT initially
      suﬀers. Around the time that ALL-D takes the lead, RAND starts to drop oﬀ
      because it can’t really compete with ALL-D in such a hostile environment. With
      the further decay of RAND, TFT makes slow but sure increases in its numbers.
      By cutting down on ALL-C and then RAND, ALL-D has carved a niche for
      itself, but has inadvertently made room for TFT to grow as well. In fact, TFT
      cannot grow without a little bit of help from the mean strategies, since, as pointed
      out before, it can never really beat another strategy in terms of outscoring it in
      a single pairing. All that TFT can really do is perform well in a wide variety of
      environments. By step 15, ALL-D has reached its peak and can grow no more
      because TFT now has a strong enough presence that it can start to cut down on
      ALL-D. Near step 20, TFT passes ALL-D and then proceeds to squash it out of
      existence.
          The numbers for the initial population levels were deliberately chosen so as to
      make this particular simulation more interesting. This is not to say that there is
      anything like a “typical” ecological IPD simulation, but that it is not very common
      to see so many swings in the population levels so early in the simulation before
      the system settles down into fixed-point behavior. The next two simulations will
      be used to illustrate several other points. First, we will see how uniform starting
      conditions can result in population levels in which multiple strategies can coexist.
      This will also give us an opportunity to see a new strategy, “Pavlov” or PAV, that
      has several interesting properties.
300                                        Competition and Cooperation




                                       1
                                                                                                                         All-C
                                                                                                                    Tit-for-Tat
                                     0.8                                                                              Random




         Proportion of Population
                                                                                                                         All-D

                                     0.6
 (a)
                                     0.4


                                     0.2


                                       0
                                                 5        10      15       20       25         30     35       40        45       50
                                                                                  Generation
                                       1
                                                                                                                         All-C
                                                                                                                    Tit-for-Tat
                                     0.8                                                                              Random




          Proportion of Population
                                                                                                                        Pavlov
                                                                                                                         All-D
                                     0.6
 (b)
                                     0.4


                                     0.2


                                       0
                                                 5        10       15      20       25         30     35       40        45       50
                                                                                  Generation
                                      1
                                                                                                                         All-C
                                                                                                                    Tit-for-Tat
                                     0.8                                                                              Random




       Proportion of Population
                                                                                                                        Pavlov
                                                                                                                         All-D
                                     0.6
 (c)
                                     0.4


                                     0.2


                                      0
                                                 5        10      15       20       25         30     35      40         45       50
                                                                                  Generation



                                           Figure 17.3 Population simulations of the ecological version of the iterated Prisoner’s
                                           Dilemma: (a) an idealized version that illustrates the rise of TFT; (b) a noise-free simu-
                                           lation with TFT winning; (c) with 0.5 percent noise PAV wins
301   Competition and Cooperation



          PAV is based on a simple “win-stay, lose-shift” principle that is reminiscent
      of Pavlovian learning. PAV starts oﬀ by cooperating but will change strategies
      whenever it is punished by a defection. If PAV plays against ALL-D, it will
      endlessly oscillate between cooperation and defection because it is continuously
      punished, which is slightly preferable to the beating that ALL-C receives under
      similar circumstances. What makes PAV interesting is that it seems to work better
      in a noisy environment than TFT does.
          Figure 17.3b shows an ecological simulation of all five strategies with each having
      an initial population proportion of 20 percent. As before, ALL-D has an initial
      growth spurt, but this time it lasts less than five time steps because the population
      as a whole started oﬀ with 60 percent of the strategies being nice. In the end, the
      three nice strategies wipe out the mean strategies, with the final ranking reflecting
      the fact that TFT deals with defectors more sternly than does PAV, which in turn
      is less tolerant of defection than ALL-C. But Figure 17.3b is a very unrealistic
      simulation primarily because in the real world mistakes happen.
          Consider what would happen if there was a slim chance that a transaction be-
      tween two strategies could be botched by a random fluctuation. If this happened
      between two TFT players, then they would endlessly exchange cooperation followed
      by defection, like two drunks trading punches long after they know what they are
      fighting over. On the other hand, if this happened between two PAV players that
      were formerly cooperating, then the oﬀended PAV player would “correct” the other
      player and eventually both would switch back to cooperation. Hence, PAV has a
      primitive sort of error correction built into it. But PAV can also exploit ALL-C in
      a noisy environment because it will continue with defection as soon as it “realizes”
      that it can get away with it. (Referring back to the earlier discussion on the update
      equations for the ecological simulations, I allowed Rij (t) to be computed on the fly
      so that noise could be easily thrown in.)
          Since PAV can tolerate noise while TFT cannot, and since PAV can exploit
      ALL-C in a noisy environment, it stands to reason that PAV may have a huge
      advantage over TFT in the presence of even a small amount of noise. Martin
      Nowak and Karl Sigmund found this to be the case when they performed their own
      IPD simulations. Figure 17.3c shows the results from a simulation with exactly
      the same conditions as Figure 17.3b, but now there is a 0.5 percent chance that a
      transaction will be randomly corrupted by noise. The result is that PAV exploits
      ALL-C almost right from the start. Later on, TFT gets into trouble because it
      echoes mistakes back and forth. In the end, PAV has the greatest numbers.
          Assuming that ecosystem members will interact with each other with frequency
      that is directly proportional to population levels is a lot like assuming that every
      one in a city will talk with every one person in equal proportions. In reality, people,
      animals, businesses, and countries are spatially divided so that it is most convenient
      to interact with immediate neighbors. In fact, in the absence of communication,
      there may be no interaction at all among distant neighbors.
302             Competition and Cooperation



 Legend

      — All-C
      — Tit-for-Tat
      — Random
      — Pavlov
      — All-D




                  Figure 17.4    Competition in the spatial iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma without noise


                   The spatial version of the IPD accounts for this by holding IPD contests only
                between immediate neighbors in a toroidal grid. At each time step, each cell will
                compete with its eight immediate neighbors and compute an overall score for itself.
                A cell will then adopt the strategy used by the neighbor with the highest score (ties
                always favor the current strategy).
                   Figure 17.4 shows six snapshots from a (100 × 100) grid over a few dozen time
                steps. Initially, the grid is randomly populated by the five strategies. After the first
                few time steps, ALL-D gains an advantage over the others, but is then partially
                displaced by the nicer players and RAND . It may be surprising that these strate-
                gies can push back ALL-D, but they do well in a spatial but hostile environment
                because a cluster of nice cells will partially cooperate with each other, while a clus-
                ter of ALL-D cells will be very unhealthy due to internal defections. Eventually,
                the three nice strategies start to take over the territory formerly owned by RAND.
                In the end, RAND is completely wiped out, leaving TFT in control of most of
                the space, ALL-C and PAV in small clusters, and ALL-D barely surviving on the
                borders. In the final snapshot, almost all the ALL-D cells reside in thin areas that
                border larger clusters of ALL-C, TFT, and PAV cells. This is due to the fact that
                ALL-D is an excellent parasite but can remain healthy only with a host.
                   For the simulation results shown in Figure 17.4, no noise was used. Had we
                used noise, the results would have been better for PAV, but that really wasn’t the
303          Competition and Cooperation



             point of introducing the spatial IPD. The spatial version illustrates how a small
             cluster of cooperating agents can prosper in a hostile environment and how parasitic
             agents can exist only in limited numbers. Others have used the spatial version with
             specially contrived initial conditions to generate interesting patterns, which is a neat
             thing to do but really yields no insight into competition and cooperation because
             such patterns are almost always artifacts of the simulation techniques used.


17.6 Final Thoughts
             None of this chapter is to suggest that anything in nature employs a pure TFT or
             PAV strategy, but it is remarkable, nonetheless, that techniques similar to these
             strategies have been found in so many diﬀerent domains. Axelrod and others have
             shown that a “live and let live” strategy similar to TFT was used by both German
             and Allied forces in trench warfare during World War I. Many examples from
             politics, economics, and sociology abound: trade barriers, face-saving diplomacy,
             kindness to strangers, and so on.
                 The key to cooperation being a winning strategy is iteration. If there is no
             chance that two parties will ever meet again, then defection is a better action from
             a game-theoretic point of view. Even biological systems obey this principle to a
             certain extent, in that some organisms are specially adapted to detect when future
             interactions are not likely to occur. Even your own gut bacteria will start to attack
             you if your stomach lining is perforated.
                 Yet, the most important point in all of this is that unilateral, mindless coopera-
             tion and defection are both bad strategies. The stability, robustness, and resistance
             of a strategy depend on a special mixture of cooperation and defection.


17.7 Further Exploration
             Those who wish to duplicate the results in this chapter can use eipd and sipd
             for the ecological and spatial versions of the IPD, respectively. Table 17.5 lists the
             options for eipd and sipd. The programs have many options, but most of the
             options have very simple usages. In each program, the initial population options
             that begin with -I take an additional argument that specifies the initial population
             number for the specified strategy. The argument supplied to this option can be any
             positive number and the total of each population need not add up to 1, since the
             program will automatically renormalize the population numbers for you. The -rcp
             option is used to specify how likely RAND is to cooperate. Setting this option to
             0 or 1 allows you to force RAND to behave like ALL-D or ALL-C, or anywhere
             in between.
                 The sipd program has a few more options that are listed at the bottom of
             Table 17.5. The -width and -height options are used to set the size of the grid
304         Competition and Cooperation



                 Option Name        Option Type       Option Meaning

                 Options Common to eipd and sipd
                 -seed          integer         random seed
                 -steps         integer         number of steps to simulate
                 -rounds        integer         number of rounds per step
                 -CC            double          reward payoﬀ
                 -CD            double          sucker’s payoﬀ
                 -DC            double          temptation payoﬀ
                 -DD            double          punish payoﬀ
                 -Iallc         double          initial population for All-C rule
                 -Itft          double          initial population for TFT rule
                 -Irand         double          initial population for Random rule
                 -Ipav          double          initial population for Pavlov rule
                 -Ialld         double          initial population for All-D rule
                 -rcp           double          probability of cooperation for RAND
                 -noise         double          probability of noise

                 Options only for sipd
                 -width            integer            width of world
                 -height           integer            height of world
                 -mute             double             probability of mutation
                 -stats            switch             print statistics?
                 -inv              switch             invert colors?
                 -xmag             integer            magnification for X windows
                 -term             string             how to plot points


                            Table 17.5    Command-line options for eipd and sipd


            that the game is played out on. With a probability specified by -mute, a cell can
            have its strategy mutate into another strategy. This is useful if you wish to see under
            what conditions homogeneous strategy clusters can be invaded by other strategies.
            Finally, with the -stat option set, the program will print out population and fitness
            statistics for each strategy at each time step.


17.8 Further Reading
             Axelrod, R. (1984). The evolution of cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
             Axelrod, R. & Hamilton, W. D. (1981). The evolution of cooperation. Science,
             211(4489): 1390–1396.
305   Competition and Cooperation



       Maynard Smith, J. (1982). Evolution and the theory of games. Cambridge: Cam-
       bridge University Press.
       Nowak, M. & Sigmund, K. (1993). A strategy of win-stay, lose-shift that outper-
       forms Tit-for-Tat in the Prisoner’s Dilemma game. Nature, 364(6432): 56–58.
       Nowak, M. A. & May, R. M. (1992). Evolutionary games and spatial chaos. Nature,
       359(6398): 826–829.
       Poundstone, W. (1992). Prisoner’s Dilemma. New York: Doubleday.
       von Neumann, J. & Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of games and economic
       behavior. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
       Wickler, W. (1968). Mimicry in plants and animals. New York: World University
       Library.
18   Natural and Analog Computation




     A technique succeeds in mathematical physics, not by a clever trick, or a happy accident,
                                    but because it expresses some aspect of a physical truth.
                                                                              — O. G. Sutton


           What is important is that complex systems, richly cross-connected internally, have
        complex behaviours, and that these behaviours can be goal-seeking in complex patterns.
                                                                            — W. Ross Ashby


                 I see the world in very fluid, contradictory, emerging, interconnected terms,
               and with that kind of circuitry I just don’t feel the need to say what is going to
                                                                      happen or will not happen.
                                                                                 — Jerry Brown




     S   oap bubbles, the mechanism behind associative memory, and approximate
     solutions to combinatorial optimization problems all share a common trait. Let’s
     start with soap bubbles. With some soap, water, a small circular wand, and a
     good gust of breath, you can create a large number of bubbles, limited only by the
     endurance of your diaphragm and the volume of your lungs. Now, in your mind’s
     eye, slow down the process of how a single bubble is made. It starts with a thin
     film of soap-water stretched across the circular opening of the wand. You exhale a
     suﬃcient amount of air to force the film to expand outward. As the film expands,
     it envelops more and more of the air that you exhale, taking on an oval-like shape.
     Eventually, a combination of air pressure and surface tension forces the end of the
     expanding film near the wand to contract. The film collapses into a point and the
     bubble breaks away.
         Here is the interesting part. When the bubble is first formed, it is not in the shape
     of a sphere. Instead, the bubble may contain imperfections, making it elongated
     along one or more directions. With an elastic snap, the bubble wobbles back and
     forth, expanding and contracting along diﬀerent directions, to finally coalesce into
     a near perfect sphere. But why does the bubble seem to “want” to be in a sphere?
308   Natural and Analog Computation



      Why doesn’t it look like a cube, pyramid, or football? Like a rubber band, a film of
      soap-water can be stretched but, given the option, rubber bands and soap films will
      always “prefer” to be in an unstretched state. Moreover, within the interior of a
      soap bubble there is a constant volume of air. Putting these two facts together, we
      see that the soap bubble has two conflicting goals that it must come to terms with
      before it can reach a “relaxed” state: It “wants” to minimize its surface area so
      as to minimize the amount that it is stretched while simultaneously maintaining a
      constant volume. Among the countless number of shapes that one could imagine a
      bubble taking, there is exactly one form that minimizes surface area while preserving
      volume, and that shape is a perfect sphere.
          Flash back to your first course in physics and to some of the dynamical system
      ideas from Part III. If energy is the potential for change, then placing a ball on the
      top of a hill results in a system in a high energy state; that is, if we slightly perturb
      the ball, it will roll down the hill, resulting in a low-energy system. Similarly, a
      soap bubble in any shape other than a sphere is in a high energy state. As the
      bubble changes from non-sphere to sphere shape, it may overshoot the desired goal
      and temporarily move in the wrong direction, just as a rolling ball can be carried
      beyond the low point of a valley to momentarily move uphill. Balls can temporarily
      move uphill as long as they have suﬃcient momentum to do so. Momentum is
      responsible for the wavy motion that a bubble experiences as well.
          The total amount of energy in either of these two systems is the sum of the
      potential energy—the height of the ball or the “unsphereness” of the bubble—and
      the kinetic energy, that is, the momentum of the moving portions of the systems.
      With this definition of total energy, a dissipative system will always move from
      a state of higher energy into a state of lower energy, and it will never go uphill.
      The energy doesn’t just disappear, however. Instead, it is transformed and moved
      outside of the system, usually as friction but ultimately as heat. So when we say
      that the bubble “wants” to be in the shape of a sphere and that it “prefers” to be
      unstretched, we are really saying that all systems tend toward low energy states as
      time goes by. The energy low point for the system is the “relaxed” state.
          But what has any of this to do with associative memory and combinatorial
      optimization problems? The lowly bubble and the mundane ball both turn out to
      be useful metaphors for distributed dynamical systems that can compute interesting
      things. Recall that the bubble “wanted” to minimize its surface area. Surface
      area is not a property of soap-water molecules, but of an entire soap film. Yet
      each molecule in a soap solution interacts only with a relatively small number of
      neighboring molecules. Hence, a global property—surface area—is minimized by
      only local interactions. Similarly, global properties such as the collection of neural
      activations that compose a distributed memory or the solution to an optimization
      problem may emerge from only local interactions.
          In the remainder of this chapter we will examine artificial neural networks with
      fixed synapses that can act as associative memories and find approximate solutions
309               Natural and Analog Computation




      dendrites
                                                             terminal fibers




                                cell body                     axon




                           Figure 18.1      A “typical” neuron with major components identified


                  to combinatorial optimization problems. In each case, we will be able to use a
                  formula to set the synaptic strength of the neural networks; hence, learning, that
                  is, the process of adaptively changing synaptic strength based on experience, will
                  not be covered in this chapter. After looking at the neural network models we will
                  once again turn our attention to energy surfaces to see how all of these things are
                  similar.


18.1 Artificial Neural Networks
                  There are many diﬀerent types of neurons, but a typical example has a cell body,
                  many dendrites, and a single axon that ends with a bundle of terminal fibers. The
                  network of dendrites provides a large collection of connection points from which
                  other neurons can interface, while the axon branches out and may form a few
                  thousand synapses with other neurons. The receiving end of a synapse may be found
                  on a dendrite or the cell body itself. You may find Figure 18.1 helpful; it shows
                  a rough sketch of a neuron that is not drawn anywhere near realistic proportions
                  because the axon on a real neuron is often enormous in length relative to the rest
                  of the cell structure.
310   Natural and Analog Computation



                                                    ★✥
             a1 (t) $$w$i1
                           $$
                        wi2 $
                            2
                            ✲                   ✲                ✲ a (t + 1)
             a2 (t)
                         ✏
                         ✶
                     wi3✏✏          Σ               ✧✦
                                                                      i

                    ✏✏
             a (t) ✏
              3                                     bi


                          Figure 18.2    A single McCulloch-Pitts neuron


          The exact underlying behavior of a neuron, as well as the influence that one
      neuron may have on another, is not completely understood but, in general, neu-
      rons can propagate information through a web of connections by sending a pulse
      through the axon. The pulse is transmitted to the terminal fibers, through which it
      may further travel to many other cells via the synaptic junctions. Neurons on the
      receiving end will have the electrical potential of their cell bodies raised or lowered.
      If this potential surpasses a threshold, then the receiving neuron may send another
      pulse to other neurons, repeating the process. This is what it means for a neuron
      to have “fired.”
          Since a single neuron can be connected to thousands of other neurons, the ner-
      vous system as a whole operates in an endlessly recursive manner, with one neuron
      stimulating many others that, in turn, may propagate activity that culminates in
      a feedback loop to the original neuron. With this high degree of interconnectivity
      and feedback, the normal state of the human brain is aperiodicity. In fact, epileptic
      seizures are known to be associated with regularity and periodicity in the brain’s
      electrical activity. Healthy brains are chaotic.
          We will consider a much more simplified view of how neurons work and limit the
      connectivity of a neural network to a form that explicitly makes chaotic behavior
      impossible. Even with the simplified neurons and connections, we will see that
      interesting computations are still possible.
          One early neural model was proposed by W. S. McCulloch and W. Pitts in the
      early 1940s. Figure 18.2 contains a simplified drawing of a McCulloch-Pitts neuron,
      and a summary of all of the terms is given in Table 18.1. The idea behind the model
      is that a neuron’s state or activation, ai (t), at time t, is a function of a weighted
      sum of all of the incoming signals:
                                             ⎛                      ⎞
                                              ! n
                              ai (t + 1) = Θ ⎝    wij × aj (t) − bi ⎠ ,
                                              j=1


      where Θ(x) is the unit step function that is equal to 1 if x > 0 and 0 otherwise,
      wij represents the synaptic strength of the connection from neuron j to neuron i,
      and bi is the threshold that neuron i’s net input must exceed before it can itself
311   Natural and Analog Computation



           Term       Meaning
             ai (t)   activation value of neuron i at time t
              wij     strength of synapse connecting neuron j to neuron i
                 bi   threshold that neuron i’s net input must exceed in order to fire
             Θ(x)     unit step function: 1 if x ≥ 0, 0 if x < 0
           sgn(x)                4 1 if x ≥ 0, -1 if x < 0
                      sign function:
                 hi   net input, j wij aj (t), into neuron i


            Table 18.1     Summary of terms used in the McCulloch-Pitts neural model


      fire. Thus, a single McCulloch-Pitts neuron computes the answer to a simple logical
      question: Is the weighted sum of incoming signals greater than the threshold bi ?
      If the answer is “yes,” then the neuron fires with an activation of 1; otherwise the
      neuron’s activation is 0. The real power of the McCulloch-Pitts neuron is in the
      nonlinear activation function Θ(x), which permits the neuron to compute many
      diﬀerent binary functions. We will explore the full power of a single neuron in
      Chapter 22.
          When a neuron is quiescent, that is, its activation is 0, it cannot send signals to
      any of the neurons that it is connected to. Because of this, it is sometimes convenient
      to rewrite the state activation rule into another form where an activation is either
      +1 or -1, and -1 represents the “oﬀ” state. We can rewrite the update rule as
                                             ⎛                       ⎞
                                               !n
                            ai (t + 1) = sgn ⎝     wij × aj (t) − bi ⎠ ,
                                               j=1


      where sgn(x), the sign function, is 1 if x > 0 and -1 otherwise, and the ai (t) terms
      are now understood to take values of either -1 or 1. With a neuron state-activation
      rule expressed in this form, it is easier to represent the notion that some collection
      of neurons should always have the same activation value. For example, if many
      neurons are connected and all have weights equal to 1, and all neurons but one are
      in the oﬀ state, then the net input into the rogue neuron will be largely negative,
      forcing this neuron to get in line with the others. This modification to the rule is
      really just a mathematical convenience for two reasons. First, for any collection
      of (-1,1) neurons, there exists a setting of weights and threshold terms for (0,1)
      neurons that gives the exact same behavior. The two representations are in fact
      equivalent. Second, the new representation is not very biologically plausible, since
      real neurons cannot inhibit other real neurons in this precise manner.
         The final thing that we need to consider is how to update the activation values
      at a given time step. There are several diﬀerent ways of going about this, and
      each has advantages and disadvantages. The two main methods are synchronous
312          Natural and Analog Computation



             updating and asynchronous updating. In synchronous updating, one simultaneously
             computes the next activation value for each neuron. The advantage here is that the
             method is completely deterministic but unrealistic in that it requires all neurons
             to obey a fixed clock. In asynchronous updating, one randomly picks a neuron
             and updates it. This method is slightly more realistic, but one must take care that
             individual neurons don’t go too long without being updated because of some strange
             statistical burp.
                 With a fixed set of connections and thresholds as specified by the wij and bi
             terms, the activation of the neurons will start with an initial value at time 0, and
             change from one time step to another. In this chapter, all of our choices of the
             weights and thresholds will result in a system that converges to a fixed point. Hence,
             at some final time T , the system that consists of all activation values will be in a
             state such that applying the update rules for any more time steps will result in the
             same set of activations.
                 Artificial neural networks of this sort, which have a collection of neurons that can
             potentially be wired to any other neuron in the system, are generically referred to as
             feedback neural networks. Researchers in this area have generalized the dynamical
             properties of the McCulloch-Pitts neurons to yield either more realistic or more
             powerful systems. There has also been considerable work that has provided more
             insight into the computational properties of the simpler neurons. Over the next
             three sections we will examine some of these key extensions and experiments. The
             big idea in each case is that the final converged state of a neural network can
             represent the answer to a question, thus performing a sort of analog computation.


18.2 Associative Memory and Hebbian Learning
             With but rare exceptions, whenever people refer to memory in the context of com-
             puters, they are referring to memory that is referenced by location. What this
             means is that if you want a particular datum, you have to know where it exists.
             This is true even for the case of named objects, such as files or program variables.
             A name is really nothing more than convenient shorthand for the datum’s actual
             location, since compilers and operating systems essentially maintain a giant list that
             maps names to locations, thus doing the tedious work for us.
                 Human memory bears little resemblance to this. To see why, answer this ques-
             tion: What 1960s rock band with four members was named after an insect and
             started the “British invasion?” Almost anyone old enough to remember the death
             of John Lennon could answer this instantly. The point of the exercise is that we
             accessed this particular memory by content and not by name, which in a way is
             exactly backward from the way one would reference computer memory. More specif-
             ically, instead of starting out with the name “The Beatles,” we started out with
             some trivial facts (1960s, four members, insect, British) and ended up with the
313   Natural and Analog Computation



      name. Humans are extremely adept at doing tricks of this sort, while computers
      usually must resort to something akin to brute force in order to do the same task.
          Content-addressable memory of this sort is usually referred to as associative
      memory, but the underlying process is so common to intelligent systems and is found
      in so many diﬀerent areas of cognition that the name really doesn’t do the process
      justice. We, as humans, have several diﬀerent but related cognitive processes that
      operate on this basic principle. We can consciously exercise one type of associative
      cognitive process by recalling memories from partial information, as we did with the
      Beatles or by playing a word association game. Face recognition is a similar process
      but occurs in a diﬀerent portion of the brain that seems to be specially designed
      for the task. And even basic behavioral conditioning demonstrates a similar type
      of binding between two separate stimuli.
          In 1949, Donald Hebb proposed a simple rule to account for such associative
      processes that now goes by the name of Hebbian learning. Hebb proposed that
      synaptic strength between two mutually connected neurons, adjusted in a manner
      proportional to the correlation between the two neurons, would account for asso-
      ciations. Simply stated, if two neurons fired at the same time, then the synaptic
      connections between them would be strengthened.
          Looking back to the McCulloch-Pitts neuron with (0,1) activation levels, Hebb’s
      rule simply states that if neurons i and j are on at the same time, then wij should be
      a positive value so as to reinforce the pairing of the two neurons. With the modified
      (-1,1) neurons, we can extend the original intention of Hebb’s rule into a form that
      also specifies that two neurons that should be oﬀ at the same time should also have
      a positive wij term. Also note that two neurons with diﬀerent activation values
      should have a negative weight connecting them. Thus, with the (-1,1) neurons we
      get slightly more expressive power at the expense of biological plausibility.
          Now, suppose that we wanted to store a memory in such a way that it could
      be recalled from only partial information. We represent the memory as a vector of
      variables, denoted by xi , that take either -1 or 1 values. You can assign an arbitrary
      meaning to each particular xi value; for instance, in the case of face recognition x1
      could mean “big nose,” x2 could mean “brown eyes,” and so on. We now use as
      many neurons as there are xi terms, and set the weights according to
                                                  1
                                          wij =     xi xj ,
                                                  n
      where n is the number of neurons in the system. For the time being we are going
      to ignore the bi terms. Now, for the case of recalling a single memory, the update
      rule becomes                             ⎛                   ⎞
                                                    n
                                                 1 !
                              ai (t + 1) = sgn ⎝       xi xj aj (t)⎠ .
                                                 n j=1

      Starting with values of ai (0) that are close to xi , we want the system to converge
314   Natural and Analog Computation



      to4
        a state such that ai equals xi for all i. This will be true if the net input,
      1  n
      n  j=1 xi xj aj (t), equals xi . Setting ai (t) to xi , we get

                                     n                n
                                  1!               1!
                                        xi xj xj =       xi = xi .
                                  n j=1            n j=1

      Thus, the system is stable in the sense that when presented with the stored memory,
      it stays in the same configuration. But if less than half of the ai (0) terms are incor-
      rect, the net input for neuron i will still have the same sign as xi , meaning that it
      will eventually converge to the stored pattern even if given incomplete information.
          One pattern is fine, but what we really want is an associative memory that can
      recall one pattern from many possible stored values. This is almost as easy, since we
      just need to compute the same weights as before, but for all of the stored patterns,
      and then add them up. Hence, if we have p patterns to store, the weights should
      be set to
                                                   p
                                               1! k k
                                        wij =        xi xj ,
                                               n
                                                 k=1

      with xki denoting the ith component of the kth pattern.
          In the next section we are going to apply these ideas to the problem of recalling
      a stored letter of the alphabet from a corrupted initial seed. The idea will be that
      our neural network will have stored a few bitmap letter images in its memory, that
      we can give it noisy or partial information to start oﬀ with, and that it will still
      be able to correctly reconstruct the stored pattern from the partial information.
      In the remainder of this section I am going to go over a few more mathematical
      details that are essential to the program used to do the experiments. You, however,
      should consider the remainder of this section optional. Keep reading if you want
      more details. But if not, you can skip or skim to the next section without too much
      loss.

         All of the preceding analysis for storing multiple patterns holds only if all of the
      patterns that we store are drawn from a random sample. When this is the case,
      the pattern and all of the individual components of each pattern are independent
      of each other. To see this more clearly, consider the full update equation with
      connection weights set to recall multiple patterns. If we set the aj (t) terms to be
      equal to one particular stored pattern, say xlj with 1 ≤ l ≤ p, we want the next
      state of the network to be equal to the xlj terms. If it were any other way, then
      our network would fail to recall a stored pattern even with perfect information, so
      this is a sort of minimal requirement that we must place on the network as a whole.
      Fortunately, to analyze this condition, we do not need to look at the whole update
      equation; we only need to make sure that the net input for each neuron i, that is,
      everything inside of the sgn(x) function that we will abbreviate as hi , has the same
      sign as xli .
315   Natural and Analog Computation



         This net input is equal to
                                               n    p
                                             1 !! k k l
                                      hi =         xi xj xj .
                                             n j=1
                                                   k=1

      We can now break up the innermost summation into two parts: one that contains
      the terms for pattern l and another that contains everything but pattern l:
                         ⎛                ⎞         ⎛                         ⎞
                      n            p                   n            p
                   1 ! ⎝ l l ! k k⎠ l             1 ⎝! l l l ! k k l ⎠
             hi =          xi xj +   xi xj xj =           xx x +      xi xj xj .
                   n j=1                          n j=1 i j j
                                   k̸=l                                        k̸=l


      Since xlj xlj is always equal to 1, the whole thing finally simplifies down to
                                                     p
                                                   n !
                                              1    !
                                   hi = xli +                  xki xkj xlj ,
                                               n j=1
                                                        k̸=l

      which finally gets down to the root of the problem. You see, if the terms inside
      of the summations are uncorrelated, then they will cancel each other out, meaning
      that the net input will in fact be very close to xli . If you draw all of the patterns
      from a random sample, then this is almost always the case. But if the patterns have
      some structure to them, or even some spatial consistency, then we have a problem.
          For example, if in the last equation we consistently find that xki = xkj for certain
      values of i and j, then this means that within every pattern there are many portions
      that are identical. This is an issue in the next section, where we will be trying to
      store bitmap images of letters. The images will always have a white border around
      them that corresponds to many neurons that are always oﬀ. Similarly, when xkj = xlj
      is true for many pairs of patterns, it means that multiple patterns will always have
      one or more neurons that consistently have the same value such as the neuron that
      corresponds to the upper-leftmost bit in the bitmap which is always oﬀ.
          Think of it this way: Associative memory works by finding similarities between
      a seed pattern and some stored pattern. But it is the diﬀerences among the stored
      patterns that account for the network’s ability to finally converge to a single pattern
      as the answer. If there is too much regularity within a single pattern or in one
      location of all of the patterns, then this information biases the computation. It’s a
      case of having too much of a good thing.
          This particular problem, as well as other diﬃculties with associative memory, can
      be appreciated with another example from face recognition. Once again, suppose
      we stored several features that describe people’s faces, but now we have many
      mostly useless features that have very little discriminatory power because they are
      so broad and general that they apply to almost everyone. Features of this sort could
      be “is between one foot and eight feet tall,” “does not have a square head,” and
316          Natural and Analog Computation




             Figure 18.3 Bitmapped images of letters from the alphabet: The first three are clean
             version that are used as patterns to be stored. The last three are used as seed images that
             the associative memory must use to recall one of the first three.


             “does not have a monstrous nose.” Once again, these features are like the borders
             around bitmap images of letters, since in nearly all cases they cannot be used to
             diﬀerentiate stored patterns. Now, suppose you wanted to store several typical
             types of faces into your memory plus your uncle Philbert’s face, which happens
             to have an enormous nose that could be described as “monstrous.” Since all of
             the useless features are negatively correlated with Philbert’s huge nose, when you
             attempt to recall Philbert’s face from partial or even complete information, these
             useless features are going to combine in such a way as to suppress the neuron
             that signifies that Philbert has a monstrous nose. The result is that the associative
             memory will probably converge to a spurious memory that only resembles Philbert’s
             features. If this happened in real associative memories, then we would be incapable
             of remembering extremely rare events, despite their novelty.
                 We can partially correct for this problem by employing the bi terms, which we
             have been ignoring up until this point. One solution is to set
                                               1!           1 !! k k
                                      bi = −       wij = −      xi xj .
                                               2 j         2n j
                                                                     k

             To see the diﬀerence that this new term has, you could once again consider the case
             of storing and retrieving a single pattern. The eﬀect is to make it easier for the
             neuron to fire because it factors in the “biasness” that all of the other neurons have
             on the one neuron that represents the odd feature.


18.3 Recalling Letters
             Using the methods described in the last section for computing the values of the wij
             and bi terms, we will now see an actual example of how an associative memory can
             recall stored patterns from partial or incorrect information. Figure 18.3 shows clean
             and corrupted versions of the letters A, B, and C. Each letter is described by a
             20×20 grid of bits with black portions representing the “on” or +1 state and white
             bits representing the “oﬀ” or -1 state. Our neural network will have 400 neurons,
317   Natural and Analog Computation




                 Figure 18.4    Recalling the letter A from a damaged seed image


      one for each bit. How we map neurons to bits in the image doesn’t really matter
      as long as we are consistent. For instance, we could simply agree that the upper-
      leftmost bit in the image is represented by neuron 1 and that the bottom-rightmost
      bit corresponds to neuron 400.
          We will store the three clean versions of the letters as the memories in the neural
      network. The weights are set according to the Hebbian rule and the thresholds are
      set as described at the end of the previous section.
          To test the ability of the neural network associative memory, we set the initial
      activations of the neurons to correspond to one of the corrupted versions of the
      letters. In Figure 18.4, I have done this for the letter A. The neurons were updated
      asynchronously, which makes the recall process a little more interesting to watch.
      As seen in the images, the network slowly starts to correct the erroneous portions of
      the image, eventually settling on the clean version of the letter. The process would
      work similarly for the corrupted versions of B and C as well.
          The result is a process not unlike what happens in biological associative mem-
      ories. Starting with incomplete and fuzzy information, the network can settle on
      something based on the similarity the seed pattern has to a stored memory. How-
      ever, this particular example is somewhat contrived and not without some faults.
      For instance, there are many more weights in this network than there is information
      in the stored patterns, which means that this particular network is grossly ineﬃcient
      memory-wise. One way of trimming the number of weights would be to remove any
      weights that were smaller than a certain threshold. There are also methods for
      merging weights and removing the redundancy of the stored patterns. The point is
      that there are real applications of artificial associative memories that are eﬃcient
      with memory, but may not be as illustrative as this example of recalling letters.
          The most interesting things about the artificial associative memory are the traits
      that it shares with real biological systems. First, while simulating this on a single
      processor computer is relatively slow, the mathematics behind the simulation is such
      that the whole system can be implemented as a collection of very simple parallel
      computers. If you imagine each artificial neuron to be a simple computer that
      looks at its net input and fires according to the update rule, then each neuron can
318          Natural and Analog Computation



             perform its own computing independently and in parallel to the other neurons. Some
             researchers have actually built massively parallel hardware versions of associative
             memories based on the same principles that we have seen.
                 Another useful quality of an associative memory that is seen in both real and
             artificial versions deals with fault tolerance. Since the associative memories are not
             actually stored in any one place or weight, if by some unfortunate accident a weight
             is destroyed, the network still stands a good chance of recalling the correct pattern.
             In the process of preparing this chapter I destroyed up to 65 percent of the weights
             without adversely aﬀecting the network’s performance.
                 Finally, all associative memories are prone to recalling spurious memories that
             are unlike any one stored pattern but are, instead, a sort of composite of many of
             the stored patterns. This can happen if an associative memory is forced to store too
             many patterns or if the patterns themselves have a representation (like the letters
             of the alphabet) that is not very conducive to being stored in this manner.
                 All of these points relate to the dynamical properties of the neurons. In the next
             section we will consider a more generalized neural model that is able to perform
             more interesting computational tasks. In Section 18.5 we will see how associative
             memories, cost optimization, and soap bubbles relate to each other from a dynamical
             system point of view.


18.4 Hopfield Networks and Cost Optimization
             We now consider a more generalized type of neuron that makes up what is commonly
             referred to as a Hopfield neural network , although similar models of neural dynamics
             have been proposed by others. John Hopfield and his collaborator David Tank used
             mathematical tools from physics to yield some important insights into how neural
             networks change over time. We will briefly examine these results in the next section,
             but here we will concentrate on the model itself and on the types of computations
             that it can perform.
                 Recall that a McCulloch-Pitts neuron has a discrete state and changes in discrete
             time steps. The artificial neurons in this section take a continuous state and evolve
             continuously over time. Thus, the model itself has more biological plausibility than
             the McCulloch-Pitts model, but it is still far simpler than a real neuron. A main
             feature of the continuous version is that it possesses an internal continuous state
             that continuously varies over time. The external state, which is the information
             that other neurons can “see,” is a simple function of the internal state. Like the
             McCulloch-Pitts neurons, the change in the internal state is a function of the signals
             that are received from other neurons.
                 The time evolution of the neurons is described by the equation
                                                 n
                                          dUi !                  Ui
                                              =     Tij Vj + Ii − ,
                                           dt   j=1
                                                                 τ
319   Natural and Analog Computation



                 Term     Meaning
                    Ui    internal state of neuron i
                    Vi    external activation or visible state of neuron i
                   Tij    strength of synapse connecting neuron j to neuron i
                    Ii    external input injected into neuron i
                  g(x)    sigmoidal activation function: 1/(1 + exp(−x))
                     τ    inverse decay term for internal state


                Table 18.2    Summary of terms used in the Hopfield neural model


      where Ui is the internal state. Tij represents the strength of the connection from
      neuron j to neuron i, Vj represents the external activation or visible state of neuron
      j, Ii is an external input that is injected into neuron i, and τ is a fixed parameter
      that determines how much the internal state decays if not excited by other neurons
      or the external input. A summary of all of the terms is found in Table 18.2. This
      diﬀerential equation specifies how Ui changes over time. We can approximate this
      as a discrete system by the equation
                                                ⎛                               ⎞
                                                   n
                                                 !                      U i (t)
                       Ui (t + 1) = Ui (t) + ∆t ⎝     Tij Vj (t) + Ii −         ⎠,
                                                  j=1
                                                                          τ

      where Ui (t) and Vj (t) are now annotated with a time index, and ∆t is the simulation
      time-step increment. All other variables that are not annotated with a time variable
      are fixed for all time. Hence, Tij , Ii , and τ are all chosen at the beginning of a
      simulation and left unchanged.
          The activation function of the neuron is denoted by g(x), which is known as a
      sigmoid function because it is S-shaped. The relationship between Ui (t) and Vi (t)
      is simply
                                                            1
                                Vi (t) = g(Ui (t)) =                  .
                                                     1 + exp(−Ui (t))
      Figure 18.5 shows a graph of g(x). Notice that the sigmoid function is very similar
      to a step function in that it thresholds the input into one of two extremes, but
      diﬀers from the step function in that it is continuous.
          A Hopfield network typically starts out in a random state with the Ui (0) terms
      chosen to be small random variables near 0. The weights and external inputs can
      be set in such a way as to solve a problem. Hopfield and Tank showed that if
      the weights are symmetric, meaning that Tij = Tji , then the network will always
      converge to state in which all Vi (t) terms are equal to either 0 or 1. It is the final
      values of the Vi (t) terms that represent a solution to a problem.
          But what problem types can you solve with a Hopfield network? In the mid-
      1980s, Hopfield and Tank (and many other researchers) applied this network to a
320   Natural and Analog Computation



                                               The Sigmoid Function
                        1




                 g(x)




                        0
                                                        0
                                                        x




                            Figure 18.5   The sigmoid activation function, g(x)


      number of combinatorial cost-optimization problems. Such problems are very easy
      to express but may have an optimal solution that is very hard to find. The example
      that we will consider is the task assignment problem, which Tank and Hopfield
      used as an example in their Scientific American article. We will use the exact same
      problem instance that they considered, but many of the details in my presentation
      will be diﬀerent.
          In the task assignment problem, one has n tasks that must be accomplished by
      using only n workers. Each worker has his own eﬃciency or cost for performing
      particular tasks; thus, for example, worker i may be better than worker j at task k.
      Our goal is to minimize the total cost for accomplishing all tasks or, stated another
      way, to maximize the throughput of all of the workers. We are also constrained
      in that each worker must perform one and only one task, and each task must be
      accomplished by exactly one worker.
          As a specific example, suppose we had to shelve books in a library, using graduate
      students as workers. We have six book subjects that must be shelved and six
      students to do the work. Each student knows the subject areas to varying degrees,
      and the more familiar a student is with a subject, the faster he or she can shelve the
      books in the proper location. The data that define a particular problem instance
      can be summarized in a 6 × 6 table, as seen in Figure 18.6. The numbers indicate
      the number of books on a particular subject that a particular student can shelve in
      one minute. Here, we see that Karen is at her best with chemistry books, and Sam
      is the fastest at shelving poetry books.
321   Natural and Analog Computation


                                                                 Book Collections


                                     Geology       Physics   Chemistry       History       Poetry       Art
                                 10            5             4           6             5            1

                        Sarah


                                 6             4             9           7             3            2

                       Jessica


                                 1             8             3           6             4            6

                       George
           Shelving
          Assistants             5             3             7           2             1            4

                        Karen


                                 3             2             5           6             8            7

                         Sam


                                 7             6             4           1             3            2

                         Tim




      Figure 18.6 The task assignment problem: Black squares in the entries denotes the
      optimal assignment with a total shelving rate of 44.


          At first glance, this seems like a simple problem. But notice that a brute force
      technique for this instance would have to consider 6! = 720 diﬀerent possible as-
      signments of students to subjects. This may be feasible for small problem sizes, but
      in the general case the factorial explosion in size makes brute force infeasible.
          The trick to solving this problem with a Hopfield network is to interpret each
      square of the table in Figure 18.6 as a hypothesis for a partial solution. For instance,
      the upper-leftmost square represents the hypothesis that a solution should include
      Sarah shelving geology books. A feasible (but not necessarily eﬃcient) solution to
      the problem will always be in the form of a permutation matrix, which means that
      each column and each row in the table will have a single element that is “on” to
      represent which person does which task. The optimal solution shown is a valid
      permutation matrix because there is only one marked square for each column and
      each row.
322   Natural and Analog Computation



       Soap Bubbles and Optimization                                        Digression 18.1

        Suppose you had several points on a grid that you needed to connect in a network such
        that there would exist a route from any point to any other point. Let’s also assume
        that you must minimize the materials you use to build the network, be it wire, fiber
        optics, or other forms of plumbing. The optimal solution to this problem is known as
        a Steiner minimum tree.

        An amazing method for finding a Steiner minimum tree involves only soap, water, two
        planes of glass, some rods, and miscellaneous hardware. Using the two glass planes as
        a sandwich, we position the rods between the planes so that they correspond exactly
        to the points that need to be connected on the grid. We would also need to make sure
        that the glass and rods are suitably bound together so that the whole apparatus does
        not fall apart; but I leave this as a detail for the reader’s imagination. We would then
        dip the whole thing in a soap-water solution so that a soap film formed between all
        of the rods. Because the soap film “wants” to minimize its surface area, the film will
        coalesce into a form that represents a Steiner minimum tree.

        While this is an impractical technique for very complicated problems, it still demon-
        strates how nature and the laws of physics can work together in order to solve in-
        teresting problems. There are many other types of phenomena that can be seen as
        solving optimization problems, if viewed in the right way (Isenberg, 1978).




         Looking at each square as a separate hypothesis for a partial solution, we can see
      that every square is in competition with all other squares that reside in the same
      column and row. Thus, the hypothesis that George shelves chemistry books is in
      direct conflict with any other hypothesis that has anyone else working on chemistry
      books or George working on any other subject. If a square, or hypothesis, is not
      in the same column or row as another hypothesis, then those two hypotheses are
      not in conflict and may, in fact, reach a sort of cooperative arrangement. We will
      represent each of these partial hypotheses as a single neuron and wire the neural
      network in such a way that the competitive and cooperative relationships are left
      intact.
         But how does this relate to setting the weights and external inputs? There is
      a very handy rule for setting these terms, discovered by Edward Page and Gene
      Tagliarini, known as the k-out-of-n rule, that oﬀers one solution to the problem.
      The k-out-of-n rule states that if you have a collection of n Hopfield neurons that
      you want to converge to a configuration with exactly k on and (n − k) oﬀ, then you
      should set each Tij term to -2 if i is not equal to j (0 if i equals j) and set all Ii
      terms to (2k − 1).
         Each column and row in Figure 18.6 represents a separate cluster in which we
      want exactly one out of six neurons to be on. Because each neuron is in two clusters
323   Natural and Analog Computation




      Figure 18.7 Computing a neural solution to the task assignment problem: This partic-
      ular solution yields a total rate of 42, which is just less than the optimal solution.


      (one for the column and one for the row), we need to use an external input for each
      neuron centered on 2(2k − 1) = 2. Also, for any two diﬀerent neurons, i and j, if
      they are in the same column or the same row, then Tij should be set to −2, since
      they are in a k-out-of-n rule cluster.
         With those settings, the neural network will converge to a solution that repre-
      sents a feasible solution, but not necessarily a good one. I used the word “centered”
      in describing the external inputs of size 2 because, in fact, we need to bias the
      inputs proportional to the rate at which a student can shelve books. Thus, the
      neuron representing that Sarah should shelve geology books will receive the largest
      external input, while the neuron representing that Tim should shelve history books
      will receive one of the smallest external inputs. But over all, the average of all the
      external inputs will be 2. We will simply skew the inputs to reflect the skills of
      the students at the specific tasks. If you look back at the update equation for the
      Hopfield neurons, you will see that the larger the external input into the neuron,
      the larger the positive change for the neuron; thus, this method biases the neurons
      that have the best chance of contributing to a good overall solution.
         Putting this all together, we start the network in a random initial state with
      each neuron being close to 0.5 in value so as to represent the initial idea that we are
      uncertain as to how the assignments should be made. The randomness is necessary
      so that ties can be broken, that is, with a constant initialization it is possible for
      the neurons to be stuck in a configuration that represents no solution. After that,
      we just let nature run its course.
         Figure 18.7 shows a snapshot of a Hopfield neural network programmed for
      this particular problem. The leftmost image shows the random initial state, with
      the gray squares representing neural output values close to 0.5. In the heat of
      competition, the squares start to lighten in color, meaning that the neural outputs
      are now closer to 0. Shortly thereafter, a few of the “stronger” neurons, which
      have higher external inputs, start to grow in strength, which is illustrated by the
      darkening squares in the third and fourth images. By the fifth image several of the
      squares have dominated their competition, leaving all column or row competitors
      near a 0 state. This makes room for weaker neurons that do not directly compete
      with the stronger neurons to gain a foothold. Finally, in the sixth image, the system
      converges to state that represents a solution with a total shelving rate of 42.
324         Natural and Analog Computation




            Figure 18.8 The energy of a system: Representing the state of the system by a ball
            on the energy surface, the system is constrained such that the ball (or state) must always
            move downhill, toward a minimum.



18.5 Unifying Themes

            Hopfield and Tank’s most important contribution to the field of neural computation
            was to show that there exists an energy function that describes the dynamical
            properties of both the McCulloch-Pitts and Hopfield models when the networks
            have symmetric weights and no self-connections. Energy functions are a tool from
            physics used to analyze and describe other, more traditional dynamical systems.
            At each time step the state of a network is always constrained to move to a point
            of lower energy. Figure 18.8 gives a representation for a two-dimensional system.
            If we imagine that the state at any particular time is a point on the surface, then
            the network as a dynamical system moves to a state like a ball rolling down the
            hill. Eventually, the ball (and network) reach a minimum. If the network has been
            wired appropriately, then the minimum can represent the solution to a problem.
                Hence, we are finally coming full circle to see why soap bubbles, associative
            memories, and approximate solutions to combinatorial optimization problems are
            similar to each other. For the associative memory, the final converged state would,
            hopefully, correspond to a stored memory. And for the Hopfield network, the min-
            ima represented solutions to an optimization problem. One fact that we can glean
            from all of this is that energy surfaces will almost always have local minima. A
            minimum that is lower than all others is referred to as a global minimum. For the
            task assignment problem, the global minimum corresponds to the best solution pos-
            sible. But as we saw, the network converged to a solution that was just suboptimal.
            This minimum is referred to as a local minimum because it is minimal only within
            a local area.
                In any event, all three phenomena represent systems in which global properties
            are optimized with only local interactions. For the soap bubble, surface area is a
325          Natural and Analog Computation



                     Option Name         Option Type        Option Meaning
                     -pfile              string             file with pattern to store
                     -tfile              string             file with test pattern
                     -local              integer            locality of permitted weights
                     -cut                double             cutoﬀ size for weights
                     -pprob              double             probability of random pruning
                     -seed               integer            random seed for initial state
                     -steps              integer            number of time steps
                     -inv                switch             invert colors?
                     -xmag               integer            magnification for X windows
                     -term               string             how to plot points


                                  Table 18.3    Command-line options for assoc


             property of the bubble as a whole and not of any one particular molecule. Like-
             wise, for the neural networks, the converged memory or task assignment solution
             is something that has meaning only in the context of all of the neurons. By itself,
             each neuron is just a single piece of the equation. So it is with some satisfaction
             that we see how these global properties can emerge from only local interactions.


18.6 Further Exploration
             All of the results in this chapter can be reproduced by the reader with two programs,
             assoc and hopfield. The command-line options for assoc are summarized in
             Table 18.3. This program can take multiple -pfile options to specify the files
             that contain the patterns to be stored. The files must be in the text version of
             the Portable Bit Map (PBM) file format. The dimensions of the PBM files must
             all agree in size. Use -tfile to specify the pattern to use as the initial state of
             the associative memory. For experimental purposes, you can use -local, -cut, or
             -pprob to remove or zero out portions of the weight matrix. The -local option
             will only allow weights that connect neurons which are near one another, “near”
             meaning that two neurons are in the neighborhood of the specified size. The -cut
             option will remove any weights that are smaller in magnitude than the specified
             value. The -pprob option will only allow the specified percentage of weights to
             remain intact; all other are randomly removed.
                 The command-line options for hopfield are shown in Table 18.4. The -specs
             option is used to specify a file that describes the task assignment costs. The file is in
             plain text and contains the number of tasks followed by the costs. The parameters
             of the Hopfield network can be modified with the corresponding program option.
             The -gain option is an extra multiplicative constant on the sigmoidal function that
326         Natural and Analog Computation



                       Option Name      Option Type       Option Meaning
                       -specs           string            problem specification file
                       -dt              double            time step increment
                       -tau             double            decay term
                       -gain            double            sigmoidal gain
                       -scale           double            scaling for inputs
                       -seed            integer           random seed for initial state
                       -steps           integer           number of time steps
                       -gray            integer           number of gray levels
                       -inv             switch            invert colors?
                       -xmag            integer           magnification for X windows
                       -term            string            how to plot points


                              Table 18.4     Command-line options for hopfield


            makes the slope steeper for values greater than 1, and gentler for values less than
            1. The -scale option is used to set how wide a spread the largest and smallest
            external inputs will have. Too large a value for this option can result in networks
            that converge on infeasible solutions. The -gray option is used to select the number
            of gray levels for plotting the activation level of the neurons. You will not need to
            use this option unless you are plotting on an unusual plotting device.


18.7 Further Reading
             Dewdney, A. K. (1989). The Turing omnibus: 61 excursions in computer science.
             Rockville, Md.: Computer Science Press.
             Isenberg, C. (1978). The science of soap films and soap bubbles. Avon, U.K.: Tiero.

             March, R. H. (1995). Physics for poets. New York: McGraw-Hill.
             McCulloch, W. S. & Pitts, W. (1943). A logical calculus of the idea immanent in
             nervous activity. Bull. Math. Biophys., 5: 115–133.
             Nilsson, N. J. (1965). Learning machines: Foundations of trainable pattern classi-
             fying systems. New York: McGraw-Hill.
             Tank, D. W. & Hopfield, J. J. (December 1987). Collective computation in neu-
             ronlike circuits. Sci. Am., 257(6): 104–114.
19   Postscript: Complex Systems




     If this seems complex, the reason is because Tao is both simple and complex. It is complex
             when we try to understand it, and simple when we allow ourselves to experience it.
                                                                          — Stanley Rosenthal


      I want to stay as close to the edge as I can without going over. Out on the edge you see
                                               all kinds of things you can’t see from the center.
                                                                          — Kurt Vonnegut, Jr.


                      Life is pleasant. Death is peaceful. It’s the transition that’s troublesome.
                                                                                 — Isaac Asimov




     H    aving sampled a few types of complex systems that are reminiscent of many
     natural phenomena, it is interesting to note that they possess so many deep sim-
     ilarities that persist despite having obvious diﬀerences. For example, the complex
     systems that we simulated included insect colonies, flocking groups, greedy game
     players, ecosystems, and statically wired neural networks. Clearly, the natural phe-
     nomena that these systems resemble exist on very diﬀerent spatial and temporal
     scales. Moreover, the components of these systems also have varying amounts of so-
     phistication: from single cells all the way up to relatively smart animals. However,
     each of the complex systems has a global behavioral pattern that depends directly
     on how closely and precisely the components are “wired” together. Systems with
     few constraints can interact in wild ways and produce chaotic-like global patterns.
     Systems that are tightly constrained fall into persistent static patterns. In between
     are systems that exhibit global patterns that are more complicated than either of
     the extremes.
         In this fourth postscript, we will examine the boundary between the two op-
     erational extremes found in complex systems and see how this boundary is found
     in many diﬀerent types of phenomena. We will first reexamine Stuart Kauﬀman’s
     work on random Boolean networks (first discussed in Chapter 15) and see how the
328          Postscript: Complex Systems



             global behavior of systems that consist of many simple parallel units is determined
             by the number of interactions that are permitted between the components.
                 Afterward, we will see that diﬃcult problems from computer science often ex-
             hibit this same type of transition. The implication is that sophisticated behavior in
             natural complex systems may be closely related to the complexity of pure compu-
             tation.
                 In the final section we will consider Per Bak’s sandpile model of self-organized
             criticality. Bak has used this model to illustrate how complex systems can naturally
             fall into a critical region in which both stability and fluidity are partially allowed.
             Moreover, at this region of criticality, the line between local and global events
             becomes blurred, since small local perturbations can often lead to an avalanche of
             activity that has a global eﬀect.


19.1 Phase Transitions in Networks
             Stuart Kauﬀman, a theoretical biologist by training, began his study of random
             Boolean networks in the 1960s to better understand gene regulation and cell dif-
             ferentiation. A random Boolean network consists of several nodes, say N , that are
             connected in a very random way. At each time step, the state of each node in the
             network is updated as a function of its inputs. All nodes are updated simultane-
             ously so that the entire state of the network changes in a single step. If the number
             of incoming connections per node is equal to K, then such a network is referred
             to as an N K network. And since these are Boolean networks, each node may be
             in one of two binary states: on or oﬀ, 0 or 1. With K incoming connections, a
             single node can receive 2K diﬀerent sets of signals. For example, with K equal to
             2, there are exactly four possibilities: (0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0), and (1, 1). A node’s
             next-state function is a Boolean function that is used to match the incoming state
             into a next state for the node. If this Boolean function is, say, the AND function,
             then the node would map the incoming signal of (1, 1) to a next state of 1 and all
                                                                                         K
             other incoming signals to 0. With K connections, there are potentially 22 diﬀerent
             Boolean functions that could be used per node.
                 The interesting thing about Boolean networks is that they are general enough
             that they can be made to look like many diﬀerent types of things. As a special
             case, any cellular automaton can be mapped into a specific Boolean network. For
             example, to build Conway’s Game of Life into a Boolean network, we could arrange
             the nodes into a two-dimensional grid, connect each node with its eight nearest
             neighbors, and uniformly select the Boolean function that implements the rules of
             the Game of Life. With other modifications, it would be possible to implement a
             variation of each of the simulated topics from this book part into a Boolean net-
             work: Chris Langton’s virtual ants, Mitchell Resnick’s termites, a discrete version
             of Craig Reynolds’s boids, a spatial version of the iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma,
             and even a discrete Hopfield neural network. The point is that Boolean networks
329   Postscript: Complex Systems



      are extremely versatile. Consequently, any discoveries made concerning generalized
      Boolean networks can conceivably be applicable to a wide variety of phenomena.
          But generality can also be a drawback, since even small values of K and N yield
      an astronomical number of ways to wire such a network; hence, it may be diﬃcult to
      say—let alone prove—anything interesting about such a general structure. When-
      ever mathematicians are faced with a mathematical construct that exists in such
      a high-dimensional space, one of the first lines of attack is to try to characterize
      random instances of the object. By itself, a single random instance does not reveal
      very much, but looking at a large number of random instances can often reveal how
      things behave in a general case. This was the approach that Kauﬀman took.1
          There are three sources of randomness in Kauﬀman’s networks. First, the entire
      collection of N nodes can be initialized to one of 2N starting states, which is a
      staggering number even for small values for N . Next, we can also vary how the
      network is connected. With K connections per node, there is ample room for ran-
      domness here. On the one extreme, with K equal to 1, each node can be potentially
      connected to any node, giving a total of N 2 diﬀerent wiring configurations. On the
      extreme of K equal to N , every node must be connected to every other node (in-
      cluding itself), yielding exactly one wiring configuration. Values of K between 1
      and N will yield an even greater number of possible configurations. The final source
      of randomness in the Boolean network resides in the choice of Boolean functions
                                                       K
      that are used. Since each node can use one of 22 diﬀerent Boolean functions, there
               K
      are N 22 diﬀerent choices that could be made.
          This seems complicated because it is. With K set to 2—a relatively small value
      for K that happens to have some very interesting properties—there are 2N × N 3 ×
      16N diﬀerent ways to initialize the network. Also note that for natural systems N
      will be extremely large because it represents the number of connected units in the
      network, for instance, genes in a string of DNA.
          The key to randomly sampling something in an informative way is to parameter-
      ize the choices. Kauﬀman did this by choosing only random samples with prespeci-
      fied values for N and K. In this way, he was able to see how random networks with
      specific values behaved over time. By performing many numerical experiments, it is
      possible to vary both N and K in a structured way so that trends can be identified.
          Most of Kauﬀman’s interests regarding N K networks were concerned with the
      long-term behavior of the networks. Since the state of a network can be one of 2N
      values, every N K network must eventually fall into a previous state. But it is not
      at all obvious how long typical limit cycles will be. Some of the specific questions
         1 Kauﬀman did his first numerical experiments back in the days when computers were pro-

      grammed with a stack of punch cards that usually had to be ordered in a very precise manner.
      Omitting or misplacing a single card would often yield disastrous results for the programmer. But
      at that time computers rarely had built-in routines for generating pseudo-random numbers. In
      order to randomly initialize his networks, Kauﬀman actually had to shuﬄe some of his cards,
      which would confuse onlookers to no end.
330   Postscript: Complex Systems



      that Kauﬀman asked and answered include the following:
         • On average, how many independent limit cycles will an N K network have?
         • What is the average length of a limit cycle?
         • How stable will limit cycles be if the state is perturbed? What if the structure
           is slightly altered by changing a Boolean function or a connection?
         • How do all of these answers vary as a function of K?
          The first two questions are obviously related, since if there is only a single limit
      cycle, then it either must pass through all 2N states or all nonmember states must
      lead to the cycle; but if there are many limit cycles, then they must all be shorter
      than 2N in length. Because 2N is such an enormous number, if the average limit-
      cycle length is anywhere close to the maximum, then the length would be eﬀectively
      infinite since it would be impossible to pass such a network through a single complete
      limit cycle using all of the resources of the universe for the entire age of the universe.
          The third question is related to the first two questions. It is possible that some
      states may not belong to any limit cycle but may only lead to a limit cycle. If this
      limit cycle is perturbed to one of these nearby states, then the network will happily
      fall back into the original limit cycle. Stable limit cycles in Boolean networks are
      very similar to the attractors in continuous dynamical systems that have large basins
      of attraction. In both types of systems, an unstable limit cycle can be broken by
      the smallest perturbation while a stable system can withstand small nudges.
          With all of these issues in mind, we can now look at some of Kauﬀman’s findings.
      Networks with K set to 1 are mostly uninteresting. By chance, an isolated cluster
      of nodes can form a feedback loop that will almost always lock into a fixed state.
      Each of these clusters will be very stable because any perturbation can propagate
      to other portions of the network through only a single connection; thus, networks
      of this type are very similar to fixed point dynamical systems.
          On the other extreme, for values of K equal to N , random Boolean networks
      yield tremendously complicated patterns, often with periodicities that are    √eﬀectively
      infinite in length. The average length of the limit cycles will be close to 2N , which
      is still exceptionally large. However, because the lengths of the limit cycles are
      so long, only a relatively small number of these cycles can exist within the finite
      state space of the network. Kauﬀman has found that on average there will be N/e
      distinct limit cycles in a K = N network (with e being the well-known constant
      2.718281· · ·). These networks are extremely sensitive to perturbations; altering
      a single bit in the network’s state will propagate changes throughout the entire
      network. For this reason, Kauﬀman describes these networks as chaotic.
          Thus, we have static behavior on one extreme and chaos on another. In between
      the two regions, with K equal to 2, the order and chaos seem to balance out.
      Interestingly, the expected number of distinct limit cycles and the average length
331   Postscript: Complex Systems


                                            √
      are both approximately equal to N when K is 2. Networks of this type will
      remain stable if slightly perturbed, but can be pushed to diﬀerent portions of the
      state space if perturbed significantly. Collectively, K = 2 networks develop a frozen
      core of inactive nodes that resist most major changes, but will have islands of active
      sites that permeate most of the network.
          More recently, Kauﬀman and others have extended these results for N K net-
      works to a significant degree. Many of the findings listed here apply to networks
      with an average of K connections (instead of exactly K). It has also been shown
      that if biased Boolean functions are used (i.e., functions that are much more likely
      to return, say, a 1) instead of random Boolean functions, then the order associated
      with K at 2 can be found in networks with larger values of K.
          Kauﬀman has made the following connection between Boolean networks and
      gene regulation. A single cell may consist of many tens of thousands of genes.
      Some genes regulate other genes, that is, when one becomes active, it will activate
      or inhibit other genes. In this way, the gene activity in a single cell closely resembles
      the activity in a Boolean network. If genes were so closely tied together that they
      forced the cell to enter into a chaotic pattern, then the cell would stand little chance
      of survival because the global behavior would be so irregular that it would have to be
      suboptimal. On the other extreme, if genes were too loosely coupled with each other,
      then a cell would be incapable of changing. But if genes were coupled at a critical
      level, then the right mixture of change and stasis could be achieved. Kauﬀman
      hypothesized that cell diﬀerentiation is related to this property and that what is
      diﬀerent between two cell types, say a neuron and a blood cell, is the specific limit-
      cycle attractor that each is in. This would explain how one genetic sequence could
      contain several diﬀerent “programs” for cell activity. A great deal of experimental
      evidence seems to support this hypothesis, since the number of specialized
                                                                          √           cell types
      for many species with, say, N genes is empirically very close to N , as Kauﬀman’s
      model predicts.
          There are also similarities between Kauﬀman’s results with N K networks, Chris
      Langton’s λ parameter, and Stephen Wolfram’s cellular automata classes. On a
      much more subtle level, the behavior of N K networks resembles many of the other
      topics covered in this book part: Boids are coordinated only through a mixture of
      attractive and repelling forces; Tit-for-Tat is successful precisely because it is both
      forgiving and vigilant; and Hopfield networks can solve problems only by combining
      inhibition and excitation in a very balanced manner.
          We have seen that both static and overly dynamic processes are not very inter-
      esting. Complexity seems to be a delicate mixture of the two. From an information-
      processing point of view, things that behave chaotically can change rapidly but have
      little ability to store information from one time step to the next. After all, it is
      impossible to retain a static piece of information if an entire network changes at
      every time step. On the other hand, static networks can retain information but are
      incapable of processing it in a meaningful way. Successful information-processing
      depends on the ability to both store and manipulate information.
332          Postscript: Complex Systems



19.2 Phase Transitions in Computation
             In the previous section, we have seen that to a certain degree, complex systems
             not only can be thought of as program-like entities but also may have interesting
             behavior that is related to computational sophistication. In this section we will look
             at a class of computer problems that has a similar quality; these problems are simple
             to solve when they are overconstrained or underconstrained, but are very diﬃcult to
             solve in between. Thus, while in the last section we saw that sophisticated natural
             computational systems reside at a critical location, in this section we will see the
             related fact that diﬃcult-to-solve problems reside at a similar critical point. This
             is important because naturally computing systems can often be seen to be solving
             a type of optimization problem (even if it is just to stay alive). If problems are
             naturally more diﬃcult at a critical location, then we should expect nature—both
             organic and inorganic—to follow suit in the sort of computations that are performed.
                 We begin with a discussion of how computer scientists classify computer prob-
             lems. One of the simplest groups is those that belong to the class P, which stands
             for “polynomial.” Examples of problems in P are number sorting and matrix mul-
             tiplication. For both of these problems, if the length of the input is of size n (e.g.,
             you have n numbers to sort or two (n × n) matrices to multiply), then there exists
             an algorithm that computes the desired solution in time that is polynomial in n.2
             Computer scientists like polynomial time algorithms because they are very fast.
                 Another class of problems consists of those in NP, which stands for nondetermin-
             istic polynomial. Any problem that is in NP has the property that a guess for the
             solution can be verified in polynomial time. For example, the well-known Traveling
             Salesman Problem (TSP)—which is the problem of finding a tour through n cities
             that visits each city once, starts and finishes at the same city, and is smaller in
             length than some specified number, l—is a member of NP because if I allege that
             some particular path is less than l in length, you can verify that it is or is not by
             just adding up n numbers and checking that the tour meets the other constraints.
             Clearly, any problem that is in P is also in NP. In fact, problems in P are the
             simplest problems in NP.
                 A very special class of problems is known as NP-complete. Problems that are
             NP-complete are the most diﬃcult problems in NP. TSP is such a problem. All
             problems that are NP-complete are such that any problem in NP can be polynomi-
             ally transformed into any other NP-complete problem. This means that if you have
             a fast algorithm for solving an NP-complete problem, then that algorithm can be
             used to rapidly solve any problem in NP.
                 There is a big caveat for the last sentence, since there are no known algorithms
             that can rapidly solve any problem that is NP-complete. Some readers may have
             heard of a famous computer science question that is stated as “Does P = N P ?”3
               2 See Section 3.4 on page 36 for an introduction to computational time complexity.
               3 A bad computer science joke answers the question “Yes. Set N equal to 1.”
333   Postscript: Complex Systems



      In everyday language, this question asks if there exists a fast way to solve challeng-
      ing computer problems. If the answer is “yes,” then this magical algorithm could
      be used to solve many problems that are currently intractable. Most computer
      scientists think that the answer to the P = N P question is “no,” but this doesn’t
      stop most computer science graduate students from making at least one honest stab
      at finding the holy grail of algorithms. However, in reality NP-complete problems
      are so diﬃcult that the best known algorithms that can solve any instance have a
      worst-case run time that is exponential. To add insult to injury, virtually every NP-
      complete problem represents a very practical real-world problem that many people
      would pay good money to solve.
          As a result of this, most people have had to be content with only approximate
      solutions to NP-complete problems. For the TSP, this would mean that instead
      of finding the best tour through the cities, an algorithm would merely find a good
      tour. Also note that specific instances of a problem can be simplified by being
      overconstrained or underconstrained. In the TSP, if there are only two roads leading
      into and out of each city, then there can be only one possible ordering of the cities
      that completes the tour, so any solution will also be the best solution. However, in
      most cases, finding even a good approximate solution is often a challenging task.
          Now that we know about NP-complete problems, we can look at another im-
      portant example from this class, known as the graph-coloring problem. Given n
      countries and a number, c, the problem is to find a “coloring” for the map such
      that it uses no more than c colors and leaves no two bordering countries with the
      same color. If such a coloring cannot be done, then any algorithm for this problem
      should report that this is the case.
          We can represent a map as a collection of nodes such that every country is itself
      represented by a single node and connections between any pair of nodes corresponds
      to a shared border between the two countries. Notice that such a graph looks a lot
      like a network except that the connections between the nodes are undirected. The
      degree of connectivity of a map has strong implications for how solvable a particular
      instance of this problem is. For example, if the graph has only a small number of
      connections, then there are few shared borders on the map. (Perhaps the map has
      many islands.) In this case, it is easy to find a solution to the problem. On another
      extreme, some maps may have a great many connections. In this case, it may be
      easy to find a cluster of (c + 1) nodes that are all mutually connected. This cluster
      of nodes presents proof that a valid coloring does not exist. For both of these cases,
      underconstraining or overconstraining the problem makes it easier to solve.
          As you have probably guessed by now, with an intermediate number of connec-
      tions in the graph, problem instances become much more diﬃcult to solve and may
      often need an exhaustive search in order to come up with an answer. To make a
      crude analogy, finding the solution to an underconstrained problem is like playing
      solitaire with a heavily stacked deck—you are almost guaranteed to win; likewise,
      a random coloring of a highly underconstrained graph-coloring problem is likely
334           Postscript: Complex Systems



              to work. Continuing with the analogy, working on an overconstrained problem is
              similar to playing solitaire with an incomplete deck: By simply counting the cards,
              you can verify that you can never win. This is similar to overconstrained problems
              because they often provably lack a solution.
                  If a single card is missing from a deck, then you may not notice without a careful
              counting. With half of the deck missing, you are guaranteed to know right from the
              start that a solitaire game cannot be won. Similarly, one extra card does not assure
              victory, but having duplicates of every card comes very close to a guaranteed win.
              The constraints of an NP-complete problem are very similar to this. At the critical
              point (i.e., having a full deck), predicting whether a solution exists or not (i.e., can
              a hand of solitaire be won?) becomes most diﬃcult.
                  Problems of this type are said to be critically constrained. Characterizing prob-
              lem diﬃculty by a constraint parameter has been performed on several other NP-
              complete problems, including the satisfiability problem (which is the most funda-
              mental member of the NP-complete class). Not only are many of these problems
              critically constrained in this manner, but some empirical evidence suggests that
              most real-world problem instances fall within the critically constrained region.


19.3 Phase Transitions and Criticality
              In the first section we saw that the behavior of a complex system can be character-
              ized by a phase transition in which the most interesting behavior lies on the border
              between order and chaos. In the second section we saw that pure computer science
              problems undergo a similar phase transition according to the degree of constraint,
              found in the problem instances. In this final section, we will consider self-organized
              criticality, a theory that suggests that many natural systems are naturally attracted
              to a critical state.
                  The canonical example of a critically self-organized system is a sandpile. Given
              a box of sand, we could gently sprinkle individual grains of sand into the center of
              the sandpile. As time goes on, the pile will grow in size by increasing in height and
              expanding outward. Sometimes adding a single grain of sand will have very little
              eﬀect on the whole sandpile, that is, it lands on the top and just sits there. Other
              times, a single grain of sand can nudge other grains that start a small avalanche
              that moves quite a bit of material. This happens because the sandpile was at a
              critical state: If left alone, it would have remained at its previous state, but a slight
              perturbation causes a significant shift. After an avalanche, the sandpile is slightly
              more stable then it was before because the instability has been transferred and
              distributed to other regions of the sandpile. However, if one continues to slowly
              add sand to the pile, its dynamics will hover about this critical point, approaching
              instability, slightly toppling over, then approaching it once again. This is why the
              critical state is said to be self-organized; it naturally approaches an organized state
              without any design.
335   Postscript: Complex Systems



          Sandpile models (as well as percolation networks) exhibit avalanches of many
      diﬀerent sizes. Small avalanches are very common, but on rare occasions large
      avalanches are possible. The size and frequency of the avalanches seem to obey a
      power law relationship, with the smallest events being the most frequent and the
      largest events the least frequent. Sandpile models appear to apply to a wide variety
      of phenomena: earthquakes, species extinction, galaxy formation, and even stock
      market activity. In every case, the complex systems appear to “prefer” to be at the
      critical value.
          For example, a sandpile that is analogous to a completely randomly connected
      N K network is like a ridiculously balanced pile with all of the grains stacked one
      on top of the other. Nudging a grain anywhere in this pile will topple the entire
      structure because it is so unstable and, therefore, infinitely sensitive. Similarly, a
      pile that is completely spread out and flat cannot be changed by moving any of the
      grains. The system is perfectly stable and resembles a K = 1 network.
          This relates to what is perhaps the most interesting aspect of critically self-
      organized systems. Systems of this type often appear to transcend our usual no-
      tions of how information flows in and out of the diﬀerent spatial levels of a complex
      system. One extreme view is that the collective subsumes and controls the com-
      ponent. Under this top-down viewpoint, the components of a system are forever
      subservient to the larger whole: Traders are at the mercy of the economy, neurons
      serve the higher-level brain components, and ants selflessly serve the colony. Under
      this worldview it is the dog that wags the tail.
          The bottom-up extreme seems to imply that the tail wags the dog. Instead
      of the components being moved by the collective, the components exert a greater
      degree of influence on the whole. In this worldview we find that the stock market
      is manipulated by traders, our thoughts are at the mercy of our neurons, and the
      colony serves the needs of the ants.
          Clearly, there is something wrong with both ways of looking at the world, since
      information and influence travel in both directions. Self-organized criticality in-
      troduces an elegant compromise to this schism. While the current stability of the
      sandpile determines how much a newly added grain of sand can alter the pile, the
      grain of sand can potentially have either no eﬀect or a tremendous eﬀect. The
      amount of influence is determined by the current state, but the next state is deter-
      mined by the grain of sand.


         In summary, complex systems exhibit a wide variety of behavior that depends on
      the degree of interaction among the components. The amount of local interaction
      largely determines the types of global interactions that are possible. The most
      interesting types of behavior are found at a phase transition between two extremes.
      These critical values are related to a complex system’s ability to process information.
      Moreover, natural systems seem to be poised on the edge of this critical point.
336         Postscript: Complex Systems



19.4 Further Reading
             Bak, P. (1996). How nature works: The science of self-organized criticality. New
             York: Springer-Verlag.
             Bak, P. & Chen, K. (January 1991). Self-organized criticality. Sci. Am., 264(1).

             Garey, M. R. & Johnson, D. S. (1979). Computers and intractability: A guide to
             the theory of NP-completeness. New York: W. H. Freeman.
             Hogg, T., Huberman, B. A., & Williams, C. P. (1996). Phase transitions and the
             search problem. Art. Intell., 81(1–2): 1–15.
             Kauﬀman, S. (August 1991). Antichaos and adaptation. Sci. Am., 265(2): 64–70.
             Kauﬀman, S. (1995). At home in the universe: The search for laws of self-
             organization and complexity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
             Kauﬀman, S. A. (1993). Origins of order: Self-organization and selection in evo-
             lution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
V   Adaptation


    In the most general sense, adaptation is a feedback process in which external changes
    in an environment are mirrored by compensatory internal changes in an adaptive
    system. In the simplest case, an adaptive system may act in a regulatory manner,
    like a thermostat, so as to maintain some property of the environment at a constant
    level. An interesting type of adaptation is found in complex systems in which the
    interactions among the subunits are allowed to change. This process is very similar
    to a self-modifying program, since the actions of the adaptive unit can aﬀect the
    environment, which, in turn, feeds information back to the adaptive system. Thus,
    adaptation can be seen as a computation of the most complex form that emerges
    through the multiplicity and recursion of simple subunits.
        This final book part contains examples of adaptation that resemble naturally
    occurring forms of adaptation. Chapter 20 concentrates on genetic algorithms as
    methods for solving many diﬀerent types of problems. Chapter 21 considers classi-
    fier systems, which contain a form of adaptation similar to what is found in social
    systems and immune systems. Chapter 22 shows how artificial neural networks
    can be used to classify patterns and to learn arbitrary functions. Finally, Chap-
    ter 23 considers how models, the phenomena they model, and search methods are
    all interconnected in a computation-like form of self-reference.
20   Genetics and Evolution




                                         Natural selection is a mechanism for generating an
                                                     exceedingly high degree of improbability.
                                                                        — Sir Ronald Fisher


                                            The goal of science is to build better mousetraps.
                                                  The goal of nature is to build better mice.
                                                                                — Anonymous


                                          A hen is only an egg’s way of making another egg.
                                                                          — Samuel Butler




     Anyone familiar with the breeding of animals knows that oﬀspring resemble
     parents. It doesn’t take a scientist to reach this conclusion. In fact, given the
     agrarian culture and economics of centuries past, the average person living close to
     a farm a thousand years ago may have been more aware of inheritable traits than
     the average person today. In any event, Charles Darwin’s mental leap from simple
     heredity to evolution and natural selection stands alone as the greatest scientific
     achievement in all of biology and is arguably the most important contribution to all
     of science. To paraphrase Richard Dawkins, never have so many natural phenomena
     been explained by so few facts. The predictive and explanatory power of evolution
     and natural selection has shed light on every facet of biology, from the microscopic
     scale of how bacteria quickly adapt and become resistant to new drugs all the way
     up to the macroscopic scale of the distribution and interrelatedness of whole species.
         To be sure, there are many details behind evolution that are still a mystery. One
     current area of debate concerns the unit of selection. A related question concerns
     what the exact definition of an organism should be. While there are many areas in
     biology that abound in controversy, this is not to say that evolution as a theory is
     in any way tentative. The empirical evidence in support of evolution and natural
     selection is as rich and complete as for any theory. Our knowledge of evolution is
     like a mountain viewed from a distance: We may not be able to discern every little
340          Genetics and Evolution



             peak, bump, or pebble, but the outline of the mountain is so clear and distinct that
             we have virtually no doubt as to the mountain’s existence.
                The strength of evolution is further reinforced by advances in computers and
             mathematics made in the last few decades. In this chapter we will see how methods
             of adaptation that are strongly motivated by biological evolution can be exploited
             to evolve computer solutions to interesting problems. In so doing, we will see how
             computer science and biology have benefited from advances in both fields.


20.1 Biological Adaptation
             The property of adaptation, from an evolutionary point of view, is often described
             by the equation adaptation = variation + heredity + selection. This distilla-
             tion of ideas, known as neo-Darwinism, diﬀers from strict Darwinism by explicitly
             making reference to a method of heredity. Breaking the equation down into basic
             terms reveals some interesting connections between adaptation and the fundamen-
             tal computational issues highlighted earlier. For example, variation, which refers to
             how individuals in a population can diﬀer from each other, is crucial to the neo-
             Darwinist view since evolution operates on no single individual but on entire species.
             Variations, by definition, can be expressed only in terms of multiple individuals;
             thus, parallelism and spatial multiplicity are essential ingredients in the algorithm
             of evolution. Similarly, heredity can be seen as a form of temporal persistence.
             When children inherit traits from their parents in discrete chunks of information,
             the traits can be seen to be iteratively passed down a time line. Thus, we have
             both parallelism and iteration as fundamental pieces of the biological equation for
             adaptation.
                 Now if we lived in a world of infinite resources where every organism was guar-
             anteed an opportunity to reproduce, then that would be the end of the story; you
             and I would not be here since evolution would never have occurred in our world.
             So it is perhaps ironic that we are indebted to the finiteness of the universe. With
             limitations on available resources, reproduction is far from a sure thing since more
             organisms will exist than can reproduce. This brings us to the often misunderstood
             term “survival of the fittest.” This phrase has been criticized as being a tautol-
             ogy since it is really equivalent to “survival of the survivors,” a nearly meaningless
             phrase. The problem here seems to be with the word “fittest,” which is usually as-
             sociated with physical characteristics independent of the ability to reproduce. But
             by “survival of the fittest” we really mean “survival of the reproducers” and noth-
             ing more. As Richard Dawkins is fond of saying, you and I can proudly make the
             claim that every one of our ancestors—without exception—survived long enough to
             reproduce. This may be an obvious statement, but if we consider the number of
             organisms that did not survive long enough to reproduce, and consider the exponen-
             tial number of descendants that could have been, then we can be seen as members
             of a truly exclusive club.
341   Genetics and Evolution



          Our ancestors may have been strong, fast, clever, or even sexy, and “survival
      of the fittest” seems to refer to some of these traits, but in truth these admirable
      traits are secondary. What really counts in natural selection is an organism’s ability
      to reproduce, and nothing else. If strength, speed, intelligence, and desirability
      happen to increase an organism’s chances of reproducing, then these traits do indeed
      correspond to being “fit,” but only in the context of reproduction. In fact, “fitness”
      can often be associated with a trait that is maladaptive in the sense that the trait
      may actually decrease the functionality of an organism. An example of this can
      be found in the peacock’s gaudy tail feathers, which can hardly do anything but
      decrease a peacock’s ability in the daily business of survival, but are selective for
      survival solely because peahens find them “sexy,” in that they are indicators of a
      peacock’s overall health and fitness.
          Adaptation, natural selection, and evolution are indeed very strange things.
      This is especially apparent when one factors in how organisms can have a recurrent
      relationship with their environments. The concept coevolution refers to how two
      species can mutually adapt to one another in such a way as to have a circular
      relationship, with one species’ influence on another ultimately returning to the first
      species in a feedback loop. We see this in the coevolution of predator and prey
      species, such as lions and gazelles. As lions became better hunters over the past
      several millions of years, they exerted selective pressure on the gazelles that they
      preyed upon, which had the eﬀect of increasing the speed and elusiveness of future
      gazelles. This in turn made it harder for the lions to get a meal, turning them into
      victims of their own success. This phenomenon is often characterized as a biological
      arms race.
          An even more elaborate and illustrative example is found in the coevolution of
      bats and moths. Bats use a form of sonar, known as echolocation, to locate moths
      to eat. To accomplish this, bats emit very high-frequency sounds that bounce oﬀ
      moths and other insects, giving them an estimate of the prey’s relative location. The
      process is actually far more complicated than one would think, since the bat-emitted
      sounds are often thousands of times more powerful than the returning echoes; hence,
      bats have evolved a technique to filter out the most powerful sounds so that they can
      concentrate on the faint return signals. By itself, this form of navigation and target
      identification is an extremely impressive and creative feat of evolution. But moths
      have coevolved a defense in the form of a soft covering on their bodies and wings
      that absorbs the bat chirps. Bats, in turn, have evolved new chirp frequencies that
      can be used to identify moths’ fuzzy coating. In response, the moths have enhanced
      their stealth technology and, furthermore, have come up with a jamming technique
      that involves emitting their own sounds to jam the bats’ return signals. This is
      often coordinated with elaborate evasive maneuvers. As if that were not enough,
      bats have evolved an elaborate flight pattern that can overwhelm a moth’s senses,
      and also periodically turn oﬀ their echolocation, making the jamming technique less
      aﬀective. And so the arms race continues (Wesson, 1991).
342          Genetics and Evolution



                The point is that every species partially molds its own environment, which makes
             the boundary between the selector and the selected somewhat indistinct. Hence,
             in many ways, Earth as whole may be best understood and appreciated as one
             enormous complex adaptive system.



20.2 Heredity as Motivation for Simulated Evolution

             Just as biological systems have evolved to a fantastically creative degree, so the
             fundamental equations of biological adaptation can be used to evolve algorithms and
             solutions to problems within the confines of the computer. In the 1960s, a handful
             of scientists from diﬀerent disciplines used ideas gleaned from natural selection
             and applied them to computational tasks. There are several variations on these
             ideas, but all of them share a biological motivation. We will briefly examine a
             broad sampling of all of these techniques in a later portion of this chapter so as to
             distinguish one from the other, but for now we will examine the ideas of the person
             most closely associated with simulated evolution.
                 In the 1960s, John Holland championed the idea of a genetic algorithm, but it
             wasn’t until the late 1980s that the idea reached critical mass in academic circles.
             More than any other technique for simulated evolution, the genetic algorithm (GA)
             approach most closely simulates real biological evolution as it maps programs and
             data into DNA-like structures that express some sort of notion of “fitness.” The
             DNA-like structures exist in populations whose members can mate, cross over, and
             mutate, thus sharing fitness-increasing traits similar to those of real populations of
             species found in nature.
                 Recall that the neo-Darwinist view of biological adaptation diﬀers from Darwin’s
             original formulation in that it includes a method of heredity. Darwin himself knew
             that his theory was incomplete, and it wasn’t until the work of Gregor Mendel, an
             Austrian monk and amateur botanist, was rediscovered at the turn of the twentieth
             century that biologists had the beginnings for a theory of heredity. Mendel indepen-
             dently performed his studies shortly after Darwin’s work was published. His careful
             experimentation on pea plants showed that traits are inherited in discrete chunks
             of information. The most telling example of this, and the example that refutes the
             idea that traits are blended or merged, involves traits that one can imagine rang-
             ing on a continuous scale but are in reality found only in either/or quantities. For
             example, the height of a pea plant may be influence by both inherited traits and
             the environment in which it grows. Thus, pea plants can be short, tall, or anything
             in between. But in a controlled environment that was a consistent and uniform for
             all plants, Mendel found that his plants would be either tall or short. Now if one
             were to mate a tall plant to a short plant, conventional wisdom at that time would
             suggest that oﬀspring would be of medium height. Such a result would have added
343          Genetics and Evolution



             support to the view that traits are merged.1 Mendel found that oﬀspring from the
             paired tall and short plants would in fact be either tall or short, not medium. He
             also found that populations of plants bred in a similar manner had characteristics
             that obeyed very simple statistics.
                 In the 1950s, Mendelian genetics was further solidified by work in molecular biol-
             ogy, the discovery of nucleic acid, and the understanding of how DNA triplets code
             amino acids that form proteins, the building blocks for everything from digestive
             acids to skin, bone, eyes, brains, and blood. The DNA in an organism consists
             of extremely long, chains of chemical bases. In higher organisms, these chains are
             organized into chromosomes, but this is an irrelevant detail for our purposes. There
             are four chemical bases in DNA, denoted by A, C, G, and T. Each base has a com-
             plement that it pairs up with (A with T and C with G), which means that every
             sequence of bases has a “mirror” version, for instance, “CATTAG” complements
             “GTAATC” and vice versa. Thus, the famed double helix of DNA consists of two
             long, intertwining strings of these letters. The crucial part of all of this is that the
             language of nature is a discrete alphabet. The fact that it consists of four letters
             is important to molecular biology, but from a computational point of view we only
             need to recognize that the alphabet is fixed and agreed upon ahead of time.
                 With the GA approach to problem-solving, we represent candidate solutions of
             problems by a string of fixed length similar to the way organisms store directions for
             maintenance and building instructions inside cells. Our strings may consist of any
             alphabet that we wish, and in the simplest case we can restrict the strings to the
             binary symbols, 0 and 1. The most important thing concerning the representation
             for the candidate solutions is that there should be a clear one-to-one method for
             mapping the strings into a more useful form. For example, a string of 0s and 1s could
             represent a floating-point number that is near the maximum of some function that
             we wish to maximize, or it could represent a solution to an optimization problem,
             or it could even express a strategy for playing the iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma. We
             will see examples of all of these types of encodings later, but for now you should
             recognize that just as long as there exists some invertible method for translating
             the strings into the information that we really want, it is possible to apply a GA to
             a problem.


20.3 Details of a Genetic Algorithm
             A basic genetic algorithm is shown in Table 20.1. The algorithm is very simple,
             with the heart of it contained in the innermost loop, which references the processes
             of selection, mating, and mutation. In this section we will examine the details of
             the algorithm in Table 20.1 with emphasis on the three aforementioned processes.
                1 Note that this would be necessary but not suﬃcient evidence for a “merged trait” hypothesis,

             since it is often the case that one physically realized trait may correspond to many inherited factors
             that are related to each other.
344   Genetics and Evolution




           • Initialize the population, P
           • Repeat for some length of time:
                • Create an empty population, P ′
                • Repeat until P ′ is full:
                     • Select two individuals from P based on some fitness criterion
                     • Optionally mate, and replace with the oﬀspring
                     • Optionally mutate the individuals
                     • Add the two individuals to P ′
                • Let P now be equal to P ′



                           Table 20.1      A simplified genetic algorithm


          For our first GA example, suppose we wished to evolve a string into a specific
      English phrase. You and I are “outside” the GA, so we can choose whatever phrase
      we wish. The GA, however, does not know what the string is. It is only allowed to
      make guesses, and for each guess it receives one piece of information in the form of
      the “fitness” of the string. How we define the fitness of the string is crucial to how
      the GA will work, because our method of selection must be based solely on this
      quantity. Ultimately, we want the selection process to somehow embody the idea
      of “survival of the fittest.” Therefore, we will go into fitness measures with a fair
      amount of detail. Afterward, we can come back to the process of selection.
          For the case of breeding text strings, it is natural to define fitness to be the
      percentage of correct letters in the guess. This fitness measure is fine for short
      phrases, but is problematic for long phrases because as we increase the length of
      the target phrase, the fitness diﬀerence between two phrases that diﬀer by one
      correct letter becomes vanishingly small. To overcome this problem, we will define
      three diﬀerent types of fitness measures, with the latter two being a function of the
      earlier fitness function. More concretely, our “raw fitness” will be the percentage of
      letters that are correct:
                                         Number of Correct Letters
                               f raw =                             .
                                          Length of Target String
          Next, we would like the notion of fitness to somehow be invariant in the length
      of the target string. This is not always possible for all problems, but for our simple
      phrase-guessing problem it suﬃces to define the following “scaled fitness” measure:
                                                          raw
                                           f scale = 2f         .
      This measure has the nice property that given two strings, where one string has one
      more correct letter than the other, the string closer to the target will be more fit
345   Genetics and Evolution



      by a constant factor as the other string. This is true regardless of the length of the
      target.2
         The final step is to normalize the fitness measure from the last step so that
      decisions concerning selection can be made regardless of the magnitude of the raw
      and scaled fitness measures. We do this by summing up all of the scaled fitness
      scores for every member of a population and dividing by the total to compute a
      “normalized fitness:”
                                                  f scale
                                     finorm = 4n i           ,
                                                       scale
                                                 j=i fj

      where i and j are indices that range over all the members of the population.
          Now that we have defined normalized fitness, we can finally talk about selec-
      tion. There are several ways that one could imagine going about this. As a first
      approximation, we could simply allow the fittest 50 percent of the population to
      reproduce. This is an easy method, but it has the downside that it doesn’t permit
      very much exploration in the DNA search space. After all, unfit individuals may
      still have some novel genes to contribute to the gene pool, so we don’t want to
      throw away genetic diversity too hastily. A better method is to use the normalized
      fitness scores as a sort of roulette wheel. For example, suppose that we had four
      individuals in the population with normalized fitness scores of 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4.
      Notice that these numbers conveniently sum to exactly 1, which is a result of the
      normalization step. Now take a roulette wheel with ten numbers on it such that
      spinning the wheel will randomly give you a number from 1 to 10. If the wheel
      comes up with the number 1, then the individual with fitness 0.1 wins. But if 2 or
      3 comes up, then the individual with fitness 0.2 wins. Similarly, 4, 5, or 6 is a win
      for the 0.3 fit individual, and everything else is a win for the 0.4 fit individual. In
      this way, each individual can expect to win in the roulette with probability equal
      to its fitness. Every individual has a chance of winning, that is, being selected, just
      as in nature.
          With the above scheme, we can now randomly select individuals to reproduce
      for the next generation. The next step in the GA is to optionally mate selected
      individuals. By “optionally” I mean that either we allow both parents to live in the
      next generation unchanged or we mate the two parents to get two oﬀspring that live
      in the next generation. Taking either action could be a good thing to do, depending
      on some special circumstances, so we allow for either possibility by flipping a biased
      coin to randomly make the decision. “Mating” can mean several things, but in the
      simplest case we perform an operation that is similar to a real-world occurrence
      called crossover . When two strings are crossed, the result is two new strings, each
      of which contains part of the genetic material of the parents.
         2 One warning: Exponential scaling is applicable only to simple GA problems like this first

      example. In more realistic situations, a linear rescaling is more appropriate. Also, we could use
      another exponentiation base besides 2, say x, to express the idea that one more correct letter
      equates with being x times more fit.
346           Genetics and Evolution




                         crossover point

      parent 1 a b c d e f g                                      a b c d x y z         child 1
                                                          ❅  ❅
                                           crossover operation
                                                          ,
                                                          ,
      parent 2 t u v w x y z                                      t u v w e f g         child 2




                                 Figure 20.1        The crossover operation in action

                  Figure 20.1 illustrates the basic idea. First, a random crossover point is chosen.
              At that point in both strings the genetic material from the left side of one parent
              is spliced to the material from the right side of other parent. A second child is pro-
              duced by swapping and pairing the other sides. In this way, portions of the genetic
              material from two fit individuals can be merged so as to potentially produce even
              more viable oﬀspring. It is certain that crossover can result in less fit individuals,
              but this is usually a minor setback that lasts only a single generation, since the
              potential rewards for merging healthy parents far outweigh the downside.
                  The final thing that we need to consider from the GA in Table 20.1 is the
              mutation operator. Once again, we do not want to always apply mutation to every
              member of the population, so we randomly make the decision with a very biased
              coin toss on a letter-by-letter basis. Thus, it is possible for some individuals to
              have multiple portions of their DNA mutated. But if the mutation rate is small,
              then most members of the population will have zero mutations applied to them.
              Mutation allows for entirely new genetic material to enter the population, which
              can yield tremendous rewards if the mutation is favorable; however, it is usually the
              case that mutations are detrimental, so it makes sense to allow mutation only on a
              very infrequent basis.
                  Putting all of this together, we can now see how a GA can find an English phrase
              through evolution. The target string for the illustrated results is the nonsensical
              phrase “furious green ideas sweat profusely,” which has a length of thirty-five char-
              acters. Before examining the GA solution, let’s briefly examine the mathematical
              properties of searching for a string of this length. We have restricted the alphabet
              to the twenty-six lowercase letters and a space, for a total of twenty-seven charac-
              ters. The number of possible strings of length 35 with twenty-seven characters is a
              staggering 2735 , equal to

                       125,236,737,537,878,753,441,860,054,533,045,969,266,612,127,846,243.

              To put this number in perspective, assuming that there are 280 electrons in the
              universe, and that the universe is around 10 billion years old, then each electron
347            Genetics and Evolution



      Time   Average Fitness     Best Fitness      Best String
        0       0.035314           0.200000        “pjrmrubynrksxiidwctxfodkodjjzfunpk ”
        1       0.070000           0.257143        “pjrmrubynrksxiidnybvswcqo piisyexdt”
        ..          ..                 ..                            ..
         .           .                  .                             .
       25       0.708686            0.771429       “qurmous gresn idnasvsweqt prifuseky”
       26       0.724286            0.800000       “qurmous green idnasvsweqt prifuseky”
        ..          ..                  ..                           ..
         .           .                   .                            .
       36       0.806514            0.914286       “uurious green idnas sweqt profusely”
       37       0.820857            0.914286       “qurmous green ideas sweqt profusely”
        ..          ..                  ..                           ..
         .           .                   .                            .
       41       0.895943            0.942857       “uurious green idnas sweat profusely”
       42       0.908457            0.971429       “qurious green ideas sweat profusely”
        ..          ..                  ..                           ..
         .           .                   .                            .
       45       0.927714            0.971429       “qurious green ideas sweat profusely”
       46       0.936800            1.000000       “furious green ideas sweat profusely”


               Table 20.2 Evolving the text string “furious green ideas sweat profusely” from an ini-
               tially random pool of strings: Fitness scores shown are for the raw fitness.



               would have to make over 300 million guesses per second for the entire age of the
               universe before a correct guess was likely to be made. Hence, to put it mildly, a
               pure random search is not very feasible.
                   To solve this problem with a GA, I used a population of 500 strings, a crossover
               rate of 75 percent, and a mutation rate of 1 percent. The results are shown in
               Table 20.2. As can be seen, the GA finds the target string in forty-six generations.
               The best strings in the population make innovations that result in small jumps in
               the best fitness score, while the rest of the population benefits a few generations
               later as the healthy genes move through the population. We could have used a
               much smaller population size, which would have resulted in the GA taking more
               generations to solve. It would also have been likely that the GA could take a step
               backward, with the best and average scores temporarily dropping. A similar eﬀect
               could be achieved by modifying the crossover and mutation rates as well. In any
               event, as the problem diﬃculty increases, so must the required population size and
               number of generations increase.
                   The real reason why a GA is able to solve this problem is that GAs can perform
               massively parallel searches. Each member of a population represents a hypothesis
               for the target string. Strings with equal fitness may, in fact, consist of completely
               diﬀerent letters. This means that crossing such a pair could result in a drastic
348         Genetics and Evolution



            improvement in the average fitness. Moreover, many such partial solutions can be
            searched for simultaneously.
                While this example is illustrative in the sense that you should now be able to
            appreciate how the selection, crossover, and mutation operations can be used to
            locate very specific and improbable strings, more common problems are not as
            trivially solved. One reason why the string-finding problem is so easy to solve is
            that each individual character has a clear ideal value, that is, the correct value for
            the target. This means that if a character is good for one member of the population,
            then it is good for every member of the population. In the real world, both biological
            and technological, fitness is usually a function of many things that are conditionally
            beneficial or harmful, depending on the context in which it exists. In other words,
            one gene may be helpful when paired with some genes but detrimental when paired
            with others. In the next section we will examine several other problem types that
            can be solved with a GA approach. In each case, the merit of any particular bit,
            letter, or number will be dependent on the state of the other characters in the
            genome of the individual. We will see that GA solutions can still yield interesting
            results even in the more challenging problem domains.


20.4 A Sampling of GA Encodings
            In this section we will consider a continuous multidimensional function optimiza-
            tion problem, a combinatorial optimization problem, and the iterated Prisoner’s
            Dilemma as candidate problems for solving with a genetic algorithm approach. By
            now, most of these problem types should be familiar to you, so the emphasis here
            will be on the relevance of these examples to real-world needs and on the techniques
            used to encode the problems into a form that a GA can use. The specific examples
            that we will consider are not necessarily more diﬃcult than the string-finding prob-
            lem that we saw in the last section, but the classes from which these new examples
            come as a whole are more challenging.

            Function Optimization In a function optimization problem one typically has a
            real-world process that behaves as a function of some parameters. In this situation
            you would usually have an analytical model of the physical process to work with.
            The goal is to find parameter settings that maximize or minimize some quantity.
            This sounds easy—after all, if you had a model, then you would only need to plot out
            the function that you wished to maximize at several diﬀerent parameter settings and
            pick the best one. This, alas, usually is not possible for many practical reasons. In
            real-world scenarios the target function may be parameterized by hundreds or even
            thousands of values, making a human-operated brute-force search infeasible. A large
            collection of real world problems that fall into this category includes finding optimal
            operating points for chemical plants, such as wastewater treatment, and for material
349   Genetics and Evolution




                      Figure 20.2   A two-dimensional function to maximize



      production facilities, and in optimizing the design of parts and machines with certain
      known goals, such as minimizing drag in an airplane design. Quite often, one already
      has a fair-to-good solution to the problem in advance. Nevertheless, optimizing
      a huge industrial process by a fraction of a percent can yield tremendous time,
      financial, and ecological savings. So finding even a slim improvement to an existing
      solution is a worthy goal.
          If we wish to maximize a quantity, then this function easily maps into our scheme
      of using a fitness function. We may need to rescale the function in order to enhance
      the searching abilities of the GA, but this is a detail that is very problem-specific.
      To encode a candidate solution into a form that a GA can use, we represent all of the
      parameters in one long binary string with a fixed number of bits for each parameter.
      The number of bits used will depend on the level of accuracy needed. Usually the
      parameters will have a known range of valid values, such as, min through max . By
      using n bits we can represent an integer range from 0 to 2n − 1. It is then a simple
      procedure to linearly rescale the integer into a valid floating-point number for the
      given parameter. Hence, if we had p parameters to search for, then an n × p bit
      string could be used to represent an individual of the population.
          Figure 20.2 shows a two-dimensional surface that we will use as an example
      function to maximize. (This surface appeared in Figure 18.8 on page 324.) The
      function is a summation of nine Gaussian functions spaced out on a 3 × 3 grid.
      The center maximum is our goal. This image should give you an idea of why
      this is a challenging problem, since interesting functions almost always have many
      suboptimal local maxima. It so happens that this function is maximal at (0.0, 0.0),
      which is in the exact center of the plot, but our GA doesn’t know this. Using ten bits
      for each number (thus, twenty for the whole string) and a population of 100, the GA
      comes up with a very good guess after only twenty-five generations or so. But by the
      seventy-fifth generation, the GA finds the optimal solution, which corresponds to
      the bit string “10000000001000000000.” Due to our encoding, this string represents
350   Genetics and Evolution



      two binary numbers, “1000000000” and “1000000000.” The method used to map
      binary numbers into floating-point numbers is

                                  8 × integer(string)/210 − 4,

      where integer(string) represents the integer value of the binary substring. This
      illustrates an important point. The binary value just less than “1000000000” is
      “0111111111,” which means that two substrings that are nearly identical in fitness
      may have exactly opposite bit string representations. Crossing such substrings will
      always result in inferior oﬀspring despite the fact that either substring in isolation
      would be a good choice. Because of this, it is likely that one substring will come to
      completely dominate the other, since the two cannot safely coexist. Metaphorically
      speaking, it is like two phenotypically similar but genetically diﬀerent animal species
      fighting for a single ecological niche. As soon as one species gains a firm foothold,
      the other can be wiped out. Such is the way of nature.

      Combinatorial Optimization The first combinatorial optimization problem we
      encountered was the task assignment problem in Chapter 18 (pages 320–323). We
      will use a GA on the exact same problem described on those pages, so you may
      wish to review the task assignment problem before continuing. Many combinatorial
      optimization problems are characterized by the fact that a valid (but not necessarily
      good) solution is specified as a permutation of the first n integers. For example,
      with a size of 6, a valid solution to the task assignment problem can consist of
      any permutation of the numbers 1 through 6, with the numbers specifying which
      worker performs which task. For the example problem instance from Figure 18.6
      (page 321), the best solution of 44 corresponds to the permutation 1, 4, 6, 3, 5,
      and 2. Also, any sequence of n integers that does not contain each integer from
      1 to n exactly once does not map to a valid solution; hence, the representation of
      our strings for the GA is limited by this fact, since we do not want members of the
      population to map to invalid solutions.
          The constraints on our string representation will also aﬀect how we apply the
      mutation and crossover operations. For mutation, we cannot randomly change
      a character in a string, since this could result in a string that corresponds to a
      completely infeasible solution. Instead, we can randomly pick two positions in the
      string and swap the entries. This preserves the constraint that each integer must
      appear in a valid string but also provides a random mix that can potentially yield
      improvements to a solution. The idea is illustrated at the top of Figure 20.3. We
      also need to modify the crossover operation, since if we were to cross two strings in a
      manner similar to the way we did in the earlier problems, invalid strings could result.
      The fix to this problem is to once again randomly pick one crossover point in one of
      the strings. But now we look at the character. The bottom of Figure 20.3 shows this
      with the character “4” being picked from the first parent. Now if the two parents
      are suﬃciently diﬀerent, when we scan the second parent for the occurrence of “4”
351   Genetics and Evolution




                         swap
                      ❄     ❄                                    ❄      ❄
                                                        ❅ ❅
                   1 5 6 3 4 2           mutation operation    1 4 6 3 5 2
                                                        ,
                                                        ,


                         swap
                    ❄     ❄                                      ❄      ❄
        parent 1 1 5 6 3 4 2                                   1 4 6 3 5 2 child 1
                                                        ❅ ❅
                                         crossover operation
                                                        ,
                                                        ,
        parent 2 1 4 2 5 6 3                                   1 6 2 5 4 3 child 2
                      ✻ swap    ✻                                 ✻        ✻



      Figure 20.3 The crossover and mutation operations applied to candidate solutions of a
      combinatorial optimization problem


      we find it in a second position. In a sense, the first parent asserts the hypothesis
      that “4” belongs in position 5 while the second parent asserts that “4” belongs in
      position 2. By swapping the characters in the second and fifth positions, we are
      combining the two parents in such a way that each oﬀspring contains a piece of each
      parent: One oﬀspring will be nearly identical to one parent, but it also shares at
      least one character with its other parent. One could easily extend this by applying
      multiple crossovers to a pair of parents at each generation, but care has to be taken
      that we don’t destroy too much of what made the parents fit in the first place.
         Using a population of ten strings, before the first generation my strings had
      an average fitness 23.1 and the best string had a score of 30. After twenty-three
      generations the GA found the same solution that the Hopfield neural network found.
      But after the twenty-sixth generation the GA found the optimal solution of 44, which
      required a single swapped pair from the neural network solution.


      The Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma Our final example GA encoding is the iter-
      ated Prisoner’s Dilemma (IPD), which we first studied in Chapter 17 (see pages 292
      and 293 for introductions to the Prisoner’s Dilemma and the iterated Prisoner’s
      Dilemma). Toward the end of Chapter 17 we saw how diﬀerent IPD strategies per-
      formed in diﬀerent environments. The spatial and ecological IPD simulations hinted
      at how strategies similar to “Tit-for-Tat” could be viable, robust, and resistant to
      invasions. We can now explore these issues from an evolutionary point of view to
      see how cooperation can be evolved.
352   Genetics and Evolution



          To encode an IPD strategy into a form that can be manipulated by a GA, we
      represent the strategies as strings that resemble lookup tables. The tables will have
      collections of entries that correspond to the actions that are to be taken, given a
      known history. If there is no information available, that is, this is the first round of
      play, then we need one bit of information to represent what our first move should be.
      But if we have at our disposal a history of one previous round, then we can base a
      move on our previous move and our opponent’s previous move, which yields a total
      of four possibilities. For the general case, with information from r previous rounds
      available, we have a total of 22r possible previous states to consider. Therefore, if
      we wish to encode a strategy that has a maximum “memory” of r previous rounds
      but can also be played in any situation
                                         4r        where the known history is less than r
      rounds, then we need a total of i=0 22i bits of information (or table entries, or
      string characters) to encode a strategy.
          A wide variety of strategies can be encoded in this manner. With r set to 0,
      we can encode only very simple strategies, such as “Always Cooperate” or “Always
      Defect.” But with r set to 1, strategies that consider a very limited history, such as
      “Tit-for-Tat” and “Pavlov,” can be represented. With even larger r it is possible
      to use sophisticated strategies that do “clever” things, such as probe an opponent
      to check if it is easily suckered or not. In the experiments that follow, we will use
      an r equal to 1, which still permits some interesting strategies but has the main
      advantage that the strings are short and thus the strategies can be easily understood.
      Therefore, a legal string for the GA to work on will consist of five letters with each
      character equal to a C or a D. The five characters, in order, represent (1) the move
      to make in the first round, and the moves to make given that in the previous round;
      (2) both players cooperated; (3) we cooperated and our opponent defected; (4) we
      defected and our opponent cooperated; and (5) both players defected.
          To evaluate the strategies in the GA population, we must have each strategy
      play many other strategies during each generation so that we have a fair estimate
      of how a given strategy competes over all. The fitness, then, for a single strategy is
      simply the average score that it achieved over each round of each IPD contest. For
      every other GA problem that we have studied, fitness was a static function with a
      meaning that was independent of what the population looked like. But in this GA
      simulation, the fitness of any individual is going to be a function of what the rest of
      the population looks like. Hence, this GA simulation is subject to a greater degree
      of feedback than the other simulations.
          Using a population of 100 individuals; fifty bouts per individual per generation,
      with each bout consisting of twenty IPD rounds; and starting the GA with ran-
      dom strategies, the GA converged to a stable solution after sixty generations. The
      average and best scores are shown in Figure 20.4. Initially, for the first fifteen gen-
      erations or so, the most successful strategies are “mean,” in that they start oﬀ with
      a defection and continue to defect in most circumstances. The mean strategies prey
      on the sucker strategies, which unconditionally cooperate. But by the sixteenth
353                    Genetics and Evolution


               4
                                                                                           Best
                                                                                        Average


 Raw Fitness
               3

               2

               1
                   0        10              20            30              40              50             60
                                                      Generations


                             Figure 20.4    Average and best raw fitness scores for the IPD-playing GA


                       generation, the best strategy is encoded by the string “CCDCD” which is our old
                       friend “Tit-for-Tat.” At this point, the average fitness of the population is in a
                       rather sickly state due to the rampant defections. But with no more suckers to
                       prey on, the mean strategies are eventually overwhelmed by all of the Tit-for-Tat
                       players. At the end, every member of the population uses “Tit-for-Tat.”
                           Although the population reached a relatively stable strategy that was more or
                       less resistant to invasions, with some modifications it would be possible for the GA
                       population to never stop evolving, with each seemingly stable state exploitable by
                       some other strategy. This is reminiscent of the Red Queen phenomenon, named after
                       the Red Queen in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking-Glass, who always moves but
                       never passes anything because her environment is rushing along right beside her.
                       With fitness being defined in terms of how an individual performs in the context
                       of its environment, those that survive tend to change their environment, if only by
                       being fit enough to reproduce. A changing environment implies a changing fitness
                       function, which further means that what was once “fit” may no longer be. This last
                       point is demonstrated by the fact that the IPD GA has a huge dip in the average
                       fitness plot, which is a phenomenon not seen in the other GA simulations with static
                       fitness functions. The situation gets much more complicated when competitive
                       species and coevolution are factored in.


20.5 Schemata and Implicit Parallelism
                       All of the previous examples demonstrate the power of genetic algorithms, but there
                       is another important attribute of GAs that warrants special attention. Genetic
                       algorithms possess a property that Holland has referred to as implicit parallelism,
                       which allows GAs to search for solutions more accurately than one would expect.
                       The result is best explained by reexamining the fundamental problem that GAs are
                       used to solve.
354   Genetics and Evolution



                                        String    Fitness
                                        10110       28
                                        01010       70
                                        10110       91
                                        01001       62


                  Table 20.3    Four binary strings from a five-dimensional space



          The goal in running a GA on any problem is to find the highest peak in the
      fitness function. For hard problems, which demand an encoding that uses very
      long strings (say, 100 characters or more), explicitly searching the entire space is
      impossible because the volume increases exponentially in the length of the strings.
      Yet we would still like to get an estimate of what the fitness function looks like
      with a subsample. By considering whole populations at once, a GA can exploit
      statistical properties of the strings with only a relatively small population size.
          To explain the basic idea, consider a population of four binary strings, each of
      which has a length of five characters and a known fitness, as shown in Table 20.3.
          By themselves, the strings tell us very little about what the whole fitness function
      looks like, but if we consider the similarities and diﬀerences among all of the strings,
      then much more information becomes available. To see why, we need to consider
      schemata, which are a type of template. A schema is a string that describes a whole
      class of strings. Schemata consist of the two binary symbols plus a wild card symbol
      denoted by “⋆”. The schema “1 ⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ⋆” represents all binary strings that start with
      a “1” and “⋆ ⋆ 0 ⋆ ⋆” represents all strings that have a “0” in the middle. In general,
      if a schema has x “⋆” characters in it, then it represents exactly 2x diﬀerent strings.
          If we knew the average fitness for a collection of strings represented by a single
      schema, then finding a peak of a fitness function becomes a little easier with the
      extra information. Looking back at Table 20.3, for n strings with length l (n = 4
      and l = 5 in this case), there are between 2l and n2l schemata. The exact number
      depends on the amount of variability in the population.
          Since a GA allocates more reproductive trials to the fittest schemata, a fit schema
      will receive an exponentially increasing number of opportunities to reproduce. And
      since the each string belongs to 2l diﬀerent schemata, a GA can eﬀectively pro-
      cess more schemata than there are strings in the population. Holland showed that,
      in general, the speedup due to implicit parallelism means that approximately n3
      schemata are processed in each generation with only n strings in the population.
      This means that performing n simultaneous searches is much more computation-
      ally eﬃcient than performing n separate searches, which explains why evolutionary
      approaches are successful.
355           Genetics and Evolution



20.6 Other Evolutionary Inspirations
              Besides genetic algorithms, there are a handful of other types of evolutionary-based
              problem-solving methods that either have been developed independently or can
              be thought of as oﬀspring of the main approaches. What follows is a very brief
              summary of how these techniques relate to GAs and to each other.

              Evolutionary Programming The idea behind an evolutionary program (EP)
              was introduced by Lawrence Fogel in 1960. EPs diﬀer from GAs in three main
              ways. First, the representation of a solution in an EP follows directly from the
              problem and is not constrained to be in the form of a string of characters, as in a
              GA. Thus, to solve a multidimensional function approximation problem with an
              EP, we would encode a solution as a vector of floating-point numbers instead of as a
              binary string. The representation issues also relate to the second diﬀerence between
              GAs and EPs, which is that EPs do not attempt to closely model genetic operations.
              Consequently, the crossover operation is not used in an EP. Third, mutations take
              a diﬀerent form in an EP. It is typical to use multivariate Gaussian perturbations
              instead of raw bit-flipping in an EP. Also, during the various stages of an EP,
              the rate of mutations is typically reduced as the optimal solution is approached.
              This means that exploration is at its highest at the initial stages—when it is most
              needed—and at its lowest toward the end, when one must be careful not to ruin a
              near optimal solution.

              Evolutionary Strategies An evolutionary strategy (ES) is very similar to an
              EP, despite the fact that both techniques were developed completely independently
              of one another. The ES approach was first conceived in 1963 by Ingo Rechenberg
              and Hans-Paul Schwefel, whom were later joined by Peter Bienert. The ES and EP
              approaches diﬀer slightly in the way selections are made and how mutations are
              performed. Also, a form of recombination is possible in an ES. Both ES and EP
              techniques are very similar in spirit to simulated annealing.

              Genetic Programming More recently, John Koza pioneered the use of genetic
              programs (GP) as a technique for evolving whole programs to solve problems. GPs
              are similar to GAs—especially since they are a spin-oﬀ technique—but diﬀer in that
              program fragments are used instead of strings. For example, the function (a + b) × c
              can be represented as a parse tree in which the leaves are the operands and the
              internal nodes are operators. With this representation, one can cross programs by
              swapping branches of the parse trees with other program branches. Since programs
              are manipulated under the GP approach, most practitioners use the Lisp program-
              ming language or a similar variant because it is easy to write Lisp programs that
              manipulate other Lisp programs. (See Section 3.3, page 30, for a brief introduction
              to Lisp.)
356         Genetics and Evolution



            Classifier Systems Another type of adaptive system, conceived of by John Hol-
            land, is a classifier system, which is a sort of cross between a Post production
            system, a genetic algorithm, and a market economy. As such, classifier systems
            combine many methods of adaptation into a single form that possesses a type of
            learning and evolution. Because of the hybrid nature of classifier systems, we will
            devote all of the next chapter to them.

                The techniques listed above are really just a small sample of the many biology-
            inspired problem-solving methods that are possible. In fact, the topics of evolu-
            tionary simulation and problem-solving are themselves subject to selective forces.
            We have some fundamental ideas developed in the GA and EP/ES paradigms that
            have been crossed, mutated, and otherwise borrowed from in order to create new
            and more powerful methods of problem-solving. Certainly, some of the current and
            future variations of evolutionary techniques will be selected against—which in the
            scientific community usually amounts to lost funding and/or lack of a publishing
            outlet—but future techniques will certainly combine some of the best features of
            each method in order to form new methods of artificial adaptation that surpass all
            of their predecessors.


20.7 Unifying Themes
            Clearly, genetic algorithms and evolutionary simulations are powerful methods for
            demonstrating the adaptive power of evolution and natural selection. By simulating
            a few simple principles (crossover, mutation, reproduction, and selection), one can
            get a glimpse of how novel and creative innovations are made in nature. While
            this simulation approach to biology has yielded a tremendous number of insights
            into how nature works, the results have also been important to engineering and
            the applied mathematical sciences by inspiring non-biologists to rethink the way
            problems should be approached.
                But, interestingly, every solved piece of the evolutionary puzzle seems to be
            replaced by two new puzzles, which is due, in part, to the complexity of the topic
            and the ubiquity of selective mechanisms. Some of the open topics lie at the heart of
            the philosophically “big questions” that we all ask. Why should evolution produce
            increasingly complex structures and organisms, with the human brain being the
            epitome? Stephen J. Gould has proposed that evolution tends to fill niches. With
            a world that consists entirely of some simple organism type, say bacteria, there are
            only so many innovations that can be made that improve fitness yet maintain the
            defining features of what it means to be a bacterium. But this kind of dances around
            the point, because it is misleading to imply that we are more fit than bacteria. The
            key idea here is that as the number of bacteria increases, it becomes easier to make
            a living as something that bacteria have not already mastered. Thus, the only
            action one could take to further this goal would be to become more complex. By
357   Genetics and Evolution



      extrapolating this line of reasoning, one can argue that all of the major innovations
      in nature are simply the consequences of species trying to find new room to grow,
      and the directions are limited to up and out.
          Related to this issue is the question regarding the unit of selection. Richard
      Dawkins has persuasively argued that a surprisingly large number of biological
      phenomena can be accounted for as artifacts of the gene being the sole unit of
      selection. This argument is especially surprising, and yet is persuasive when applied
      to apparently altruistic animal behavior. If each of our genes is selfish in the sense
      that it exists solely for its own propagation, then how does one account for bees
      that sacrifice themselves for the benefit of the hive, birds that warn of predators,
      gazelles that do an eccentric dance to distract lions, and other such behaviors? If
      one does the math, it turns out that a gene actually improves its long-term survival
      rate if it encourages self-sacrifice for the benefit of other relatives that share the
      same gene.
          While selfish genes are an elegant solution to a thorny issue, we also know that
      nature exploits the use of “chunks” by building up levels of complexity in hier-
      archies. For example, our cells are largely the result of a partnership of bacteria
      made a billion years ago; organelles that perform specific cell functions, such as
      metabolism and movement, are descendants of specialized bacteria that at one time
      existed independently of each other. In some cases organelles even possess their own
      DNA. Multicellular organisms such as humans, and super-organisms such as insect
      colonies, are further applications of nature’s increasing complexity by using more
      complicated building blocks. In all three cases, there are vast quantities of shared
      genetic material with a limited distribution channel (nucleus, sperm or egg cells, and
      queen bee) that can be used to account for the overall cooperation of the system.
      Yet not all cooperative systems consist of entities that share DNA, which means
      that selfish genes cannot be the whole story when it comes to units of selection.
      One only needs to look at the delicate balance of resources found in ecosystems to
      see that species can be interconnected and selected for in highly complicated ways
      that cannot be explained by genes alone. On the far end of the selection spectrum is
      James Lovelock’s Gaia hypothesis, which argues for a definition of life that includes
      Earth as a living organism. In many ways, this whole debate is a prime example
      of the reductionism versus holism conflict. But both extremes seem to be missing
      something.
          Perhaps the most tantalizing feature of natural selection as an explanation of
      evolution is that it appears to have some explanatory power in non-biological sys-
      tems as well. Richard Dawkins has coined the term meme to stand for a unit of
      cultural information. Dawkins explains:

           Examples of memes are tunes, ideas, catch-phrases, clothes fashions,
           ways of making pots or of building arches. Just as genes propagate
           themselves in the gene pool by leaping from body to body via sperms or
358          Genetics and Evolution



                   eggs, so memes propagate themselves in the meme pool by leaping from
                   brain to brain via a process which, in the broad sense, can be called
                   imitation.

                 Reconsidering the equation adaptation = variation + heredity + selection
             as applied to non-biological things, it is easy to see how businesses, cultures, and
             ideas can vary and be selected for, but heredity in these cases takes on a whole new
             meaning. The so-called central dogma of biology posits that genetic information
             flows in one direction, that is, DNA codes RNA, and RNA codes protein, but protein
             does not code DNA. This idea is central to the current model of genetic heredity.
             An interesting historical footnote is that even though the science of genetics was
             unknown in Darwin’s time, Jean Baptiste Lamarck (who coined the term “biology”)
             proposed a method of heredity long before Darwin’s work that is now known as
             Lamarckism. Lamarck had observed that organisms change in response to their
             environment, and proposed that organisms pass on these changes to their oﬀspring.
             Thus, Lamarckism would suggest that a giraﬀe, by extending its neck to eat higher
             leaves, can endow its oﬀspring with a longer neck solely through its eﬀorts to stretch.
             We now know that Lamarckism is not directly applicable to biological heredity;
             nevertheless, Lamarck’s ideas had considerable influence on Charles Darwin, who
             failed to come up with a more feasible method of heredity.
                 As ridiculous as Lamarckism may now sound for biological adaptation, it is a
             perfectly reasonable method of heredity for non-biological systems. This means that
             in some ways non-biological evolution can take shortcuts not available to biological
             systems because acquired improvements can be incorporated and passed along to
             oﬀspring. This will be especially important in the next chapter when we combine
             ideas from evolution and cultural adaptation into a single adaptive mechanism.


20.8 Further Exploration
             All of the programs highlighted in this chapter use essentially the same underlying
             GA engine. All of the command-line options are summarized in Table 20.4. The
             program code is very straightforward and can be used as a basis for your own GA
             programs. Modifying the GA code for another task will usually involve writing a
             mapping from the objects that you wish to optimize into a string, as well as writing
             a function that defines the fitness of one of your objects.
                 In addition to gasurf, which I used to maximize the surface, there is a program
             called gabump that is identical except that it attempts to find the maximum of a
             scalar function that consists of a single localized bump. You may want to play with
             this program in greater detail, since it is easier to understand how the GA search
             works in a single dimension. Both of these programs use the -len option to specify
             how many bits to use for each floating-point number. The -power option aﬀects the
359   Genetics and Evolution



             Option Name        Option Type       Option Meaning

             Options Common to all GA programs
             -size          integer         population size
             -gens          integer         number of generations
             -seed          integer         random seed
             -crate         double          crossover rate
             -mrate         double          mutation rate

             Options Only for gastring
             -target          string              target string

             Options Only for gabump and gasurf
             -len             integer         DNA length

             Options Only for gastring and gatask
             -pbase           double          power base for fitness

             Options Only for gaipd
             -bouts           integer             bouts per generation
             -rounds          integer             rounds per bout
             -hlen            integer             history length
             -noise           double              chance of mistake in transaction
             -CC              double              reward payoﬀ
             -CD              double              sucker’s payoﬀ
             -DC              double              temptation payoﬀ
             -DD              double              punish payoﬀ
             -dump            switch              print entire population at end?


       Table 20.4   Command-line options for gastring, gabump, gasurf, gatask, and gaipd



      scaling of the fitness functions for all of the programs except gaipd. As an exercise,
      you may wish to replace this with a linear scaling.
          Finally, the -noise option for gaipd can be used to introduce errors into the
      IPD transactions. When there is noise in an IPD, strategies that retaliate harshly
      tend to suﬀer, so you can use this to encourage more forgiving strategies to evolve. I
      was able to evolve a more forgiving version of “Tit-for-Tat” that could correct itself
      if an error was made while playing another copy of itself. The -hlen option can
      be used to change the number of previous plays that are considered for each IPD
      strategy. Several researchers have performed similar simulations with variations on
360         Genetics and Evolution



            the memory length. Robert Axelrod and Stephanie Forrest found that a population
            of IPD players with a memory of three time steps was able to produce a strategy
            that attempted to bluﬀ weak strategies but reverted to “Tit-for-Tat” when faced
            with a player that was not gullible.


20.9 Further Reading
             Barlow, C. (1991). From Gaia to selfish genes: Selected writings in the life sciences.
             Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
             Bowler, P. J. (1996). Charles Darwin: The Man and his influence. Cambridge:
             Cambridge University Press.
             Dawkins, R. (1976). The selfish gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
             Dewdney, A. K. (1985). Computer Recreations: Exploring the field of genetic
             algorithms in a primordial computer sea full of flibs. Sci. Am., 253(5): 21–32.
             Goldberg, D. E. (1989). Genetic algorithms in search, optimization, and machine
             learning. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
             Holland, J. H. (1975). Adaptation in natural and artificial systems. Ann Arbor:
             University of Michigan Press.
             Koza, J. R. (1992). Genetic programming: On the programming of computers by
             natural selection. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
             Michalewicz, Z. (1996). Genetic algorithms + data structures = evolution pro-
             grams. New York: Springer-Verlag.
             Mitchell, M. (1996). An introduction to genetic algorithms. Cambridge, Mass.:
             MIT Press.
             Ridley, M. (1995). The red queen: Sex and the evolution of human nature. New
             York: Macmillan.
             Watson, J. D. (1991). The double helix: A personal account of the discovery of the
             structure of DNA. New York: New American Library.
             Wesson, R. (1991).      Beyond natural selection.     Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford
             Books/MIT Press.
21   Classifier Systems




       Mathematicians are inexorably drawn to nature, not just describing what is to be found
                                                there, but in creating echoes of natural laws.
                                                                              — Roger Lewin


     Plasticity is a double-edged sword: the more flexible an organism is the greater the variety
      of maladaptive, as well as adaptive, behaviors it can develop; the more teachable it is the
     more fully it can profit from the experiences of its ancestors and associates and the more
                                          it risks being exploited by its ancestors and associates.
                                                                                — Donald Symons


                            Repetition is the only form of permanence that Nature can achieve.
                                                                         — George Santayana




     We ended the previous chapter with the idea that acquired traits and experi-
     ence could aid systems in more rapidly adapting to an environment. In this chapter
     we will refocus on the themes of genetic algorithms in the context of direct environ-
     mental feedback and of simple reinforcement learning, so as to couple two types of
     adaptation into a form that more closely resembles the adaptation found in cultural,
     social, economic, and other competitive systems. The major focus of this chapter
     will be on classifier systems, yet another invention of John Holland, that combines
     all of these idea into an elegant framework for solving problems.
         To explain the motivation behind classifier systems, we should first reexamine
     genetic algorithms in terms of how they interact with an environment. A GA pro-
     duces several candidate solutions to a problem by making iterative improvements
     to existing solutions via the genetic operators. For most of the cases that we exam-
     ined, a GA manipulated a string of characters that essentially encoded a location
     in a search space. The function optimization and string-matching problems are
     particularly clear examples of this. For the last example in Chapter 20, which en-
     tailed evolving strategies for the IPD, the strings represented lookup tables that
362   Classifier Systems



      specified moves to be made, given a particular history. Thus, we can think of the
      evolved strategies not just as being points in a search space but as being simple
      algorithms because they specify a mapping from environmental states (the previous
      IPD history) to actions (an appropriate move).
          This observation gets at the heart of the issue regarding the limitations of GAs,
      their applicability to complex problems, and the motivation behind classifier sys-
      tems. If an actual algorithm is needed, then a pure lookup table is a horribly poor
      way of encoding a program. Lookup tables, by definition, are programs that have
      no local memory and either must have an entry for every possible environmental
      state or must compress the state information in a manner that washes out much of
      the information. Neither alternative is attractive, especially because neither allows
      for the possibility of dealing with environmental states that cannot be anticipated.
      More sophisticated programs require memory and something akin to recursion or
      iteration. Classifier systems add both of these features to genetic algorithms.
          Related to this issue is that adaptive systems must change at rates comparable
      with those of their environments. For example, every year all plants and animals
      experience the change of seasons and must compensate for the varying tempera-
      tures by scheduling their activities in conjunction with the weather. For organisms
      that have adapted to the change in weather in a predominantly evolutionary man-
      ner, short-term temperature fluctuations happen so fast relative to the machinery
      of evolution that there is little chance that they can successfully respond to the
      changes. Flowering plants, some of which have a relatively hardwired method for
      determining the time of year, can be fooled into releasing pollen too early by an
      unseasonably warm streak of winter weather. This is an example of a failure for
      evolution and lookup tables, since the instantaneous observable state of the envi-
      ronment (today’s weather) is not always a good indication of the real state of the
      weather (midwinter). On the other hand, you and I and many other animals can
      base our decisions on the current state, remembered states, and remembered pay-
      oﬀs for previous behavior. Because of this, we can diverge from preprogrammed
      behavior and take actions that are more a function of our own experiences than
      of our ancestors’ experiences. Similarly, classifier systems adapt on multiple time
      scales, which makes them responsive to both short-term and long-term events.
          All of this is reminiscent of the “nature versus nurture” question, which is some-
      what of a fallacy on its face because the question seems to imply that there is an
      either/or or yes/no answer to it. In reality, all suﬃciently complex biological sys-
      tems must adapt to the environment on several enormously diﬀerent time scales.
      We have evolution, which adapts the species to long-term events; cultural adapta-
      tion, which preserves useful knowledge between the generations; and many diﬀerent
      types of learning that adapt a single individual to very specific circumstances.
          Great attention and respect are paid to the two extreme types of adaptation
      found in evolution and learning, but culture adaptation seems to get shortchanged
      in the comparison because, for whatever reason, it is easy for us to forget that
363         Classifier Systems



            twentieth-century humans have benefited from thousands of years of acquired knowl-
            edge. Yet, animals also possess a form of culture that goes beyond mere instinct.
            On one level, animal culture acts as a glue between instincts and learning. Birds
            may be born with the disposition and urge to sing, but the composition, imita-
            tion, and general acquisition of birdsongs are skills passed throughout an entire
            bird population. On rare occasions, animal innovations are witnessed by scientists
            just when they are discovered by other animals. One impressive instance of this
            was when some British tits found that they could peck their way through the metal
            tops of milk containers left on doorsteps. Other bird species were able to copy the
            act, and eventually the skill spread to continental Europe (Wesson, 1994).
                In this chapter, we will see that classifier systems are basically general-purpose
            computing devices that are modified by both environmental feedback and an un-
            derlying genetic algorithm. In this way, classifier systems can be seen as a bridge
            between evolution and learning. Moreover, their behaviors, as well as their underly-
            ing mechanisms, resemble processes found in social, cultural, and economic systems,
            which is especially pleasing when one considers that these social phenomena span
            our own evolution and learning adaptive processes.
                What follows is a brief introduction to some of the issues in control theory, which
            is followed by an overview of production, expert, and classifier systems. We will
            then consider Stewart Wilson’s zeroth level classifier system, and finally play with
            two toy experiments that illustrate the ability of classifier systems to adapt.


21.1 Feedback and Control
            For the purposes of this discussion, successful adaptation is best explained in terms
            familiar to engineers and control theorists. Figure 21.1 shows a simple diagram that
            defines the framework in which just about any adaptive system must work. The
            environment is represented by a single box that has a well-defined state that changes
            from one moment to the next. The current state of the environment is determined
            by both the previous state and the control signals by which an agent manipulates
            the environment. The agent is usually restricted in the amount of information it can
            observe at any time; hence, the visible features will usually correspond to a subset
            of the environment’s state. Finally, how the agent behaves, that is, the actions that
            it performs when certain environmental features are observed, can adapt depending
            on the type of reinforcement received by the environment.
                The diﬀerence between adaptive and nonadaptive systems, as well as the diﬀer-
            ences between the types of adaptation that can occur, are summed up by the single
            feedback arrow labeled “reinforcement” in Figure 21.1. In a strictly nonadaptive
            control system there is either no extra reinforcement information or the reinforce-
            ment is somehow trivially bundled into the observable state. A simple thermostat
            is a fair example of this because it can observe only the present temperature and
364           Classifier Systems



                                                  reinforcement                     current state

                           Agent /
                                                  control actions        Environment
                         Controller

                                                  visible features


                          Figure 21.1    Adaptation through environmental reinforcement


              can base its control actions solely on that information. In a truly adaptive system,
              actions that were unsuccessful in previous but similar states may be discarded in
              favor of actions that were more successful. In a sense, feedback allows for a complex
              adaptive system to reprogram itself.
                  Given the framework defined in Figure 21.1, there are many situations in which
              methods from linear control theory and traditional adaptive control theory can be
              successfully applied with little complication. These techniques, all of which owe
              something to Norbert Wiener and cybernetics, are well understood analytically
              and—when they work at all—work quite well. The caveat here is the same as in
              dynamical systems theory: Most things in nature are highly nonlinear and, as a
              result, control actions can have unpredictable results on an environment.
                  The general control problem—How does one find the optimal controller for a
              particular environment and objective function?—will never be completely solved
              because it is just too complicated as expressed. Things are further complicated
              when one factors in diﬃculties such as delayed rewards and punishments. In such a
              situation, a reward may be received only after a long sequence of actions has been
              taken. It is natural to associate the most recent action with the reward, but easy
              to lose sight of the fact that early actions may be just as crucial. Similarly, in other
              situations one may have to take a step backward, for instance, sacrifice a pawn in
              chess before a move forward (taking the queen) is possible. This means that any
              measure of success has to be flexible enough that long-term goals are not sacrificed
              in the interest of short-term goals. We will examine all of these problems in later,
              more detail.


21.2 Production, Expert, and Classifier Systems
              Classifier systems, expert systems, and Post production systems all share a similar
              underlying structure. Because of this, we will briefly examine the latter two topics
              so as to better understand the first. All of these systems consist of simple rules of
              the form
365   Classifier Systems



                                       if condition then action,

      which has the same meaning as similar statements in most programming languages.
      If the condition portion of the statement is satisfied, then the action portion of
      the statement is executed. With many such rules, a single satisfied condition can
      trigger an action that causes other rules to be activated, forming a chain of execution
      that can carry out an arbitrary calculation. In fact, a Post production system is
      computationally equivalent to any other universal computing device.1 This is an
      important distinction; since a classifier system is built with a Post production system
      beneath it, it is theoretically possible for a classifier system to represent any possible
      computation. If this were not the case, then classifier systems would be incapable,
      even in theory, of solving an infinite variety of problems.
          An expert system is a special type of program that resembles a Post production
      system. Expert systems were prominently hailed as a major success of the symbolic
      artificial intelligence community in the 1980s, but the enthusiasm died down some-
      what when the results did not keep pace with expectations. At this time, however,
      expert systems are slowly making a comeback due to new levels of sophistication in
      design and implementation, as well as rising CPU performance/price ratios. In any
      event, expert systems, and especially fuzzy expert systems, are a natural way of en-
      coding expert knowledge into an automated form that nonexperts can use. An ideal
      home for expert systems is found in diagnostic applications. For example, doctors
      can consult a medical expert system by answering several questions concerning a
      patient with an undiagnosed condition. The questions could take the form of “Does
      the patient have a fever?” “What is the white blood cell count?” and so on. An
      expert system may even recommend specific tests to be performed. After being
      supplied with a suﬃcient amount of information, the expert system will follow the
      nested chain of expert rules to compute a probable diagnosis for a patient. In this
      way, the knowledge of one human expert can be put into a form that can be more
      easily distributed to the masses, so as to do the most good.
          Perhaps the single most important reason why there are not as many expert
      systems in use today as there could be is that the task of embedding human ex-
      pert knowledge into machine form is extremely diﬃcult and time-consuming. If
      the human expert happens to diagnose problems through very logical and well-
      defined steps, then encoding this knowledge into a rule set may not be too trying.
      Unfortunately, this is rarely the case, since most humans aren’t sure how they go
      about doing an intelligent task, which makes the “knowledge engineering” portion
      of building an expert system extremely diﬃcult.
          Classifier systems are not typically used on the same sorts of problems that ex-
      pert systems are, though a handcrafted classifier system can always be built that
      emulates any expert system. Instead, classifier systems are most often applied to
         1 See Chapter 3, and in particular Section 3.2 on page 26, for other universal models of compu-

      tations.
366   Classifier Systems



      control-like problems, as defined in the previous section. Also, unlike Post produc-
      tion systems and expert systems, classifier systems are almost never “programmed”
      to solve a problem but are instead expected to discover working solutions on their
      own.
          We will now examine classifier systems in more detail. There are several slight
      variations on the basic form of a classifier system, but I will use a stripped-down
      version that is true to Holland’s original formulation of the idea. In general, a
      classifier system consists of a set of classifiers and a message list . The message list
      serves multiple functions. At each time step the message list will contain messages
      that describe the current observable state of the environment. The classifiers can
      post additional messages on the message list, making the list serve as a sort of
      temporary storage space. Also, specific messages may correspond to actions that
      an agent should perform.
          A classifier system interacts with its environment through detectors and eﬀec-
      tors. The detectors are like sensory organs in that they are responsible for posting
      the messages on the message list that correspond to the observable environment.
      The eﬀectors can be thought of as hands and feet since they can be used to mod-
      ify the environment. Stretching the analogy further, the message list is similar to
      short-term memory, while the classifiers themselves are akin to portions of an an-
      imal’s nervous system. Figure 21.2 shows a basic schematic of a classifier system
      interacting with its environment.
          As to the classifiers themselves, each consists of a triplet in the form
                                  condition:message:strength.
      The condition of the classifier is similar to the condition in the rules of a Post
      production system or expert system; however, classifier conditions are made up of
      the two binary digits and a special symbol, “#,” which is a “don’t care” symbol.
      A classifier’s condition matches a message if, and only if, all of the symbols are an
      identical match with the corresponding characters in the message, or if the classifier
      has a “#” in an unmatched position. Thus, the “#” symbols are wild cards in that
      they match anything. With the “#” symbols, classifiers can match messages with
      varying amounts of specificity. On one extreme a classifier can be a perfect match
      for exactly one message. But with n “#” symbols, a classifier can potentially match
      2n diﬀerent messages. With these details in place, we can now simulate a single
      cycle of how a classifier system interacts with its environment.
         1. The detectors place messages on the message list that correspond to observable
            features in the environment.
         2. A match set is formed from all classifiers whose conditions match any of the
            messages on the message list.
         3. The classifiers bid against each other for the right to post their messages. The
            bids are always a function of the strength of the classifiers. Some classifier
367             Classifier Systems




                                          Environment
                                                                                            ✻
                1. features encoded                     6. control actions applied
            ❄
        Detectors                     ✲ Message List                        ✲        Eﬀectors
                                                1011            5. new messages posted
                                                0000
       Classifiers                                            ✛                  Action Set
                                                1100
      #011:1001:43                                                              1#00:0100:88
                          2. match set formed          3. highest bidders
      10#1:1010:22                                                                   ✻            ✻
                                                          form action set
      0111:0110:12                                ❄
      1#00:0100:88                    ✲    Match Set
      0110:1111:63
      101#:1011:38                        #011:1001:43
            .
            .                             10#1:1010:22
            .                                                                            7. payoﬀ rewarded
                                          101#:1011:38
            ✻
                                          1#00:0100:88

                                                                       4. bids paid (bucket brigade)



                           Figure 21.2     A classifier system interacting with its environment


                      systems incorporate the specificity of a condition into the bid, that is, the
                      more specific a rule (the fewer the number of “#” characters), the greater the
                      bid. An action set is formed from the highest bidders. There may be more
                      than one winning classifier in the action set.

                   4. The classifiers in the action set pay a portion of their bids to the other classi-
                      fiers (if any) that were responsible for posting the message that matched their
                      condition. The paid classifiers have their strengths increased as a result.

                   5. The message list is erased and a new message list is formed from the message
                      portions of all the classifiers in the action set.

                   6. If any of the new messages in the message list correspond to a real action,
                      then the eﬀectors process the action appropriately. (There may be need to
                      resolve conflicting actions, e.g., “move left” versus “move right,” etc.)
368   Classifier Systems



         7. If the environment rewards the classifier system, then the reward is divided
            among the classifiers in the action set, which increases the strengths of the
            winning classifiers.

      The process then repeats for another time step.
          Ignoring the details of how the strengths are modified for a moment, we can
      visualize a single classifier system cycle more concretely with an example from
      nature. Suppose the classifier system is responsible for controlling the actions of a
      frog. The frog lives in a grid world and can observe only the eight adjacent grid
      cells nearest it. The messages posted by the frog’s eyes (the detectors) can contain
      information about what is immediately in the vicinity of the frog, such as, “fly
      located at NE cell” or “alligator located at S cell.” The classifiers can represent a
      hypothesis for a good action to take, depending on the posted messages. If there is
      a single message that corresponds with “fly located at NE cell,” then “move NE”
      would be a good action. Landing on a fly (and, therefore, eating it) could be a
      source of reward. On the other hand, if there is an alligator nearby, then a classifier
      that posits that the frog should flee in the opposite direction would probably be the
      right choice.
          When classifiers are responsible for actions that lead directly to rewards, those
      classifiers are rewarded for having done a good thing. But notice that in the fourth
      step, classifiers pay other classifiers. This allows for the possibility that a chain of
      events may have to take place for a reward to be received. Classifiers that do well
      will pay other classifiers that help them to be activated. Thus, a classifier system is
      a lot like an information economy where classifiers bid and make payouts to other
      classifiers, purchasing the right to be activated.
          Holland has named the method by which classifiers pay other classifiers the
      “bucket brigade” algorithm, which gets its name from the fact that payments are
      passed down a line of classifiers, reinforcing all in the chain, in much the way an
      old-time fire brigade would pass buckets of water down a chain of people in order
      to get water to a fire. The bucket brigade algorithm works in much the same way,
      but passes information down a chain of classifiers instead.
          We can see why these chains can be important by looking back to the frog ex-
      ample. Without chains, it would be possible to encode a simple but fairly successful
      classifier system that merely made decisions based on the most recent information
      from the detectors. Such a system would see an alligator, flee for one time step,
      and “forget” that there was an alligator in the direction it just came from. If a fly
      happened to come by at the wrong time and place, the frog would happily jump
      back toward danger just for a quick meal. Without memory, there is no other pos-
      sible way for the frog to behave. But with a classifier system’s message list, chains
      can actually represent the basis of a long-term memory.
          We can see how this is possible by considering the frog in a dangerous situation
      again. Faced with the initial message “alligator located at S cell,” a triggered
369   Classifier Systems



       Immune Systems                                                        Digression 21.1

        The main task of the immune system is to identify foreign material in an organism so
        that it can be removed. Antibodies assist by binding to foreign bodies that are then
        removed by macrophages. In order to accomplish all of this, human antibodies must
        be able to distinguish the approximately 105 types of proteins that may be found in
        a typical human body from the nearly infinite variety of foreign invaders. How all of
        this is done is mostly a mystery, but what is known about the immune system looks
        like a remarkable combination of evolution and learning.

        Every antibody possesses a special region, known as the paratope, for identifying
        foreign molecules. If such a molecule has been identified, then the antibody can bind
        to it through a complementary site known as the epitope. As a long-term goal, immune
        systems must be able to bind to as large a number of foreign materials as possible.
        But on a short-term basis (say, during an infection), immune systems must produce
        vast quantities of a specific type of antibody. As to the first need, an unbelievably
        large number of the diﬀerent antibody types can be made by combining a smaller
        number of building blocks coded in the DNA, but to meet specific needs, antibody
        production of a specific type is elevated by the very act of their binding to foreign
        materials, thus fulfilling both goals.

        Doyne Farmer, Norman Packard, and Alan Perelson have made a compelling compar-
        ison between immune systems and classifier systems. New antibodies are produced
        by combining building blocks in a manner very similar to genetic crossing. It has
        also been shown that the mutation rate is elevated during this stage. Moreover, if one
        thinks of the paratope as a classifier’s condition and the epitope as an action, then the
        concentration of the specific antibody types starts to resemble a classifier’s strength.
        Through a novel mixture of adaptive processes, the immune system can guard against
        an amazing array of potential invaders.




      classifier could post a message that amounted to “Danger at distance x, position
      y.” This new message could then trigger two other classifiers, one that posts the
      message that triggers the eﬀector to actually flee, and the other that posts a new
      message that amounts to “Danger at distance x′ , position y ′ ,” where x′ and y ′ are
      estimates of the alligator’s new location relative to the frog after the frog has moved.
      This last message will now be present on the next cycle of the classifier system, which
      means that the frog will “remember” that there was something dangerous recently
      encountered.
          Up until this point we have ignored genetic algorithms, but it turns out that
      GAs play a very important role in the adaptation of a classifier system. When a
      classifier system starts interacting with its environment, it is typical for it to have
      randomly selected classifiers. Because of this, the initial behavior is likely to be close
370          Classifier Systems



             to random. Once the classifier system gets lucky and receives a reward, individual
             classifiers will be reinforced by having their strengths increased. After some time,
             it is likely that some classifiers will be strong while others will be relatively week.
             Moreover, we may find that there are not enough of the “right” classifiers to do the
             job. A GA can be used to weed out the weak classifiers and form new ones from the
             stronger classifiers. Because each classifier has a digital representation, it is a simple
             matter to use a GA to cross successful classifiers to form new and novel classifiers.
             Thus, GAs are responsible for removing bad classifiers and introducing new and
             potentially good classifiers, while the bucket brigade algorithm is responsible for
             doling out credit and strengthening those classifiers that help the whole system
             achieve a reward.
                 In this way, a classifier system can be thought of as a composition of partial
             hypotheses. Each classifier represents a single hypothesis that is applicable to a
             limited number of situations. No single classifier is in charge, yet the system as
             a whole can adapt and form an overall pattern of behavior that emerges from the
             competition and cooperation of the individual pieces.


21.3 The Zeroth Level Classifier System
             In this section we will examine a simplification of Holland’s classifier system pro-
             posed by Stewart Wilson. Wilson refers to this classifier system as a “Zeroth Level
             Classifier System” (ZCS) because it is in many ways the simplest type of classifier
             system that captures all of the essential pieces of Holland’s ideas. Wilson performed
             many interesting experiments with classifier systems that gave him some insights
             into what are the most important features of a classifier system. ZCS is a partic-
             ularly elegant design because it is easy to implement, and once it finds a solution,
             the solution can be easily understood.
                 All of the experiments in Section 21.4 will be performed on a ZCS; hence, we will
             examine the ZCS in enough detail to allow you to implement the system yourself.
             There are three major diﬀerences between a ZCS and a standard classifier system.
             First, a ZCS has no message list, which is to say that the message portion of all
             classifiers essentially corresponds to an action by the eﬀector. Thus, for clarity, we
             will refer to this portion of the classifier as the action. This diﬀerence also means
             that there can be no long-term memory in a ZCS. We will look at a simple extension
             at the end of this section that incorporates memory into the scheme. Second, action
             strings do not have to have the same string length as the conditions. Conditions are
             matched to the state returned by the detectors; thus, conditions will have the same
             string length as the observed state (the input to the system) while actions will have
             a string length that corresponds to the number of actions the eﬀector can perform.
             The final diﬀerence between the two schemes is that the ZCS uses what has been
             called an “implicit bucket brigade,” which is a simplification of the original bucket
             brigade algorithm.
371             Classifier Systems




                                          Environment
                                                                                       ✻
                1. features encoded                   5. control actions applied
            ❄
        Detectors                     ✲     Match Set                              Eﬀectors
                                                              3. highest bidders       ✻
                2. match set formed     #011: 01 :43
                                                                 form action set
                                        #0##: 11 :14
       Classifiers                    ✲                                   ✲     Action Set
                                        001#: 01 :27
      #011: 01 :43                      #0#1: 11 :18                           #011: 01 :43
      11##: 00 :32                                                             001#: 01 :27
      #0##: 11 :14                                                                            ✻
                                              4. bids paid to old action set
      001#: 01 :27
                                                 (implicit bucket brigade)
      #0#1: 11 :18
      1#01: 10 :24                        Old Action Set ✛
            .
            .                                                                       6. payoﬀ rewarded
            .                             11##: 00 :32


                Figure 21.3 Wilson’s zeroth level classifier system interacting with its environment
                (Wilson, 1994)


                   Figure 21.3 shows a ZCS system with its environment. A single cycle of a ZCS
                can be described as follows:
                   1. The features in the visible portion of the environment are encoded by the
                      detectors. The result is a binary string (not shown in the figure, but equal to
                      “0011”) that is matched to the classifiers in the next step.
                   2. The match set is formed by comparing the condition of every classifier against
                      the binary string returned by the detector. If no such classifier exists, then a
                      special step (called “covering”) is taken to add a new matching classifier to
                      the ZCS.
                   3. Using a random roulette selection method on the strengths of all classifiers in
                      the match set (identical to the roulette selection method described in Chap-
                      ter 20), a single classifier is chosen. All classifiers in the match set that
                      advocate the same action are then placed in the action set.
                   4. Every classifier in the action set pays a portion of its strength to every classifier
                      in the previous action set (if it exists).
372   Classifier Systems



         Symbol      Meaning
           β         learning rate for strength updates in implicit bucket brigade
           γ         discount factor for payments made to previously active classifiers
           τ         tax rate for strength reduction on classifiers in M but not A
           ρ         probability of invoking the GA in a given ZCS cycle
           φ         covering parameter; covering occurs if s(M ) < φ s(P )/|P |.


                            Table 21.1     Summary of ZCS parameters


         5. The control action is applied by the eﬀectors.

         6. Any reward received by the ZCS is evenly distributed to all classifiers in the
            action set.

      After the final step, the current action set replaces the old action set, and the cycle
      begins anew.
          The previous description omits a few details concerning how payoﬀ is distributed
      to the classifiers. To further explain things, we need to use some symbols to denote
      the various sets and some other special values. Let P refer to the entire classifier
      population, M refer to the match set, A to the action set, and O to the old action
      set. Also, for any of the sets (A, for example), let the notation s(A) refer to the total
      strength of every classifier of the set and let |A| refer to the number of classifiers in
      the set.
          We can now more rigorously describe the credit assignment as follows. All of
      the system parameters are summarized Table 21.1. To start, a fraction, β, of the
      strength of each classifier in A is deducted from all members of A. This total
      amount, β s(A) is stored for a later step in a temporary holding place, which we
      will refer to as the “bucket” or b. Next, if the ZCS receives a reward of r after
      taking the action, then the strength of each member of A is increased by βr/|A|.
      Afterward, if O is not empty, then the strength of each member of O is increased
      by γb/|O|, where b is the “bucket” used in the first step. Finally, all members of M
      that are not part of A have their strength reduced by τ , which can be thought of
      as a penalty or tax for having advocated a non-winning strategy.
          The process of changing the strengths of the classifiers can be intuitively de-
      scribed by the following. Each classifier that contributes toward a specific action
      pays a portion of its strength to the classifiers that helped the ZCS get into the state
      that activated the action. That is why credit is passed from the current action set
      to the old action set. Next, each of the classifiers in the action set evenly shares in
      any reward received. Also note that at the next time step they will receive a share
      of the rewards at that time, but discounted by γ. Thus, classifiers pay those that
      help them and receive payment from those they help. The final step of the credit
373         Classifier Systems



            assignment, that is, the taxation step, makes the ZCS eventually more decisive.
            Wilson explains that the taxation reflects an explore/exploit tradeoﬀ: A lower tax
            rate allows diﬀerent actions to be tried while a higher tax rate encourages a specific
            action to be exploited.
               The reinforcement algorithm can be combined with a GA as follows. Using a
            biased coin, the GA can be invoked at each cycle of the simulation with probability
            ρ. When the GA is invoked, exactly two parents are selected, via roulette selection
            on their strengths, that will have oﬀspring that replace two other members of the
            population that are chosen by roulette selection on the inverse of their strengths.
            Thus, the strongest classifiers are most likely to reproduce and replace the weakest
            classifiers, but the whole process is stochastic, so anything can happen. This pro-
            cedure is especially convenient because it keeps the population size constant and
            operates with a trivial amount of overhead at each cycle of the ZCS. As in the
            previous chapter, new oﬀspring can be crossed and/or mutated. If they are crossed,
            then the average of the parents’ strengths is used as the strength of the oﬀspring.
               In the second step of the performance cycle of the ZCS, it is possible for there to
            be no classifiers that match the current state returned by the detectors. When this
            happens, a special operation is invoked. The current state is used as a template
            to create a new classifier condition, “#” symbols are randomly sprinkled on the
            condition, the action of the new classifier is randomly set, and the strength of
            the classifier is set to the average strength of the population. The new classifier
            replaces an existing classifier that is chosen by roulette selection on the inverse
            of the strengths. Wilson refers to this as the “covering operation” and compares
            the process to rote memorization. Covering is also used if s(M ) is less than some
            fraction of the population’s average strength, which occurs when every member of
            the match set is relatively week.


21.4 Experiments with ZCS
            We are now ready to put together everything from the last section to see how
            classifier systems can learn to solve problems. We will consider three problems in
            this section, all of which require us to simulate an artificial environment for the
            classifier system to interact with. The first two problems are test cases proposed
            by Wilson. The last problem is a standard test problem from the reinforcement
            learning community whose solution requires that the ZCS be augmented with a
            form of memory.

            Woods1 Figure 21.4 shows an environment known as Woods1 that defines a rect-
            angular grid world that a virtual creature (or “animat”) is allowed to roam through.
            All of the actions of the creature are dictated by a ZCS. The ZCS can “see” only
            the eight cells that immediately surround it in its current location, and it is per-
            mitted to move only one step in one of the four compass directions at each time
374   Classifier Systems



              .......................................................
              .OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF.
              .OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO.
              .OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO.
              .......................................................
              .......................................................
              .OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF.
              .OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO*.OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO.
              .OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO.
              .......................................................
              .......................................................
              .OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF..OOF.
              .OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO.
              .OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO..OOO.
              .......................................................


      Figure 21.4 Environment of Wilson’s Woods1: Shown are rocks (“O”), food (“F”),
      empty spaces (“.”), and the ZCS’s current position (“*”)


      step. The grid world wraps around so that as soon as the ZCS steps oﬀ one side, it
      is transported to the opposite edge; thus the grid world is infinite in size as far as
      the ZCS is concerned.
          Grid cells in Woods1 either are empty (“.”), contain food (“F”), or contain a
      rock (“O”). The ZCS can walk through empty space but cannot walk through rocks.
      If the ZCS lands on food, it receives a reward of 1000. The detector of the ZCS
      works by mapping the eight nearest cells into a binary string of sixteen characters.
      Food has a sensor code of “11,” rocks are coded by “10” and a blank is represented
      by “00.” The first two characters in the detector string correspond to the cell just
      north of the ZCS, and all other character pairs correspond to the remaining cells,
      working clockwise from the northern cell. Thus, for the displayed ZCS position in
      Figure 21.4, the detector would return the sixteen-bit string “0000000000101011.”
          Since the ZCS is rewarded only when it lands on a piece of food, its goal is to
      get food as quickly and as often as possible. The ZCS is trained by running several
      trial problems. A single problem consists of placing the ZCS at a random location
      in the grid world. The ZCS produces an action, and if it corresponds to moving to
      anything other than a rock, then the move is allowed. If the ZCS lands on food,
      then it receives its reward, the world is reinitialized to the initial configuration, and
      the ZCS is randomly relocated. In this way, the ZCS can experiment by trying
      many diﬀerent actions under several diﬀerent circumstances.
          If the ZCS performed nothing more complicated than a random walk, then from
      a random starting position we could expect it to take approximately twenty-seven
375                       Classifier Systems


                 30

                 25                                                                          short average
                                                                                          running average
                                                                                                   optimal
                 20                                                                                random


 steps to food
                 15

                 10

                 5

                 0
                      0                500                   1000                  1500                      2000
                                                           problems



                          Figure 21.5 ZCS performance in Woods1: The “short average” plot is an average over
                          the 50 most recent trials. The running average curve is over all past trials.


                          steps to find food. If the ZCS behaved perfectly and always proceeded by the
                          shortest path to the nearest food, then it would require only about 1.7 steps on
                          average. Using a population of 400 classifiers and parameter values described in
                          Section 21.5, the ZCS starts oﬀ close to random and does very poorly, but after less
                          than 100 trials it gets down to four steps. After several hundred more steps the
                          performance is improved a bit more.
                              The overall performance for a single experiment is shown in Figure 21.5. As
                          can be seen, the performance is far better than random, not quite as good as a
                          perfect system but not so bad, considering that the solution was found automati-
                          cally. Looking back to Figure 21.4, we can perform some hindsight analysis to see
                          why the problem of traversing Woods1 is solvable. Woods1 has the property that
                          no matter where one is located in it, it is always possible to tell where the nearest
                          food is, based solely on the eight adjacent cells. This is due to two facts. First,
                          Woods1 is perfectly periodic, so once you know what a small portion of the world
                          looks like, you know the whole world. Second, regardless of where one stands in
                          Woods1, there is always at least one observable feature that tells you exactly where
                          you are standing relative to the rocks. This means that Woods1 is a relatively easy
                          problem.

                          Woods7 Figure 21.6 shows Wilson’s Woods7 environment, which is much more
                          complicated than Woods1. From the map, it is pretty clear that it has neither of
                          the two properties that made Woods1 an easy problem. Not only is it possible to
                          get lost in Woods7, that is, there are many areas that look similar with limited
                          perception, but the food and rocks are arranged in a nonuniform manner.
376   Classifier Systems



             ...........O.........................OO.........O.........
             .OFO.......F........F.........O.......F.........FO........
             ...........O........OO.......F............................
             ............................O......O.........F......O.....
             ...F.......OFO........OFO..........F.........OO......F....
             ...OO..............................O..................O...
             ..........OO.......O........OO....................O.......
             .OFO.......F.......OF........F.........OFO........F.......
             ..................................................O.......
             ...OO.......O.................O........OO.......O.........
             ...F.......F.......O.........FO........F........OF....OFO.
             ...........O.......OF.....................................
             ..O......................O............O......O.......O....
             ..F.......F...............F..........FO.......F......OF...
             ..O.......OO...............O...................O..........
             .....................O.....................O..............
             ...F........OFO......F..........F.........F......OF.......
             ...OO................O..........OO.......O.......O........


      Figure 21.6 Environment of Wilson’s Woods7: Shown are rocks (“O”), food (“F”), and
      empty spaces (“.”)


          The experimental results for a typical run using an identical setup for training
      a ZCS to traverse Woods7 as was used in Woods1 are shown in Figure 21.7. Once
      again, the ZCS does far better than random but not quite as well as the optimal
      solution. To be fair, the ZCS really doesn’t stand a chance of coming close to the
      optimal solution because the ZCS has no memory and cannot, therefore, tell where
      it is located on the map. If you had memory, then after passing several distinctive
      features it would be possible to find your exact location; hence, the ZCS is really
      at a disadvantage.
          In general, the ZCS will wander around in some general direction when it can
      see only blanks. When it comes directly adjacent to some food, it will eat it. But
      when the ZCS sees a rock, it will move around the rock, apparently looking for the
      expected morsel of food. Sometimes the ZCS gets confused and makes a bad turn,
      which accounts for some of its ineﬃciency. Nevertheless, it is impressive that the
      ZCS can learn the general pattern of the map that food always occurs near a rock.


      The Cups Problem Our final experiment involves what is known as the “cups
      problem,” which seems like a silly problem at first but turns out to be quite chal-
      lenging (Whitehead & Lin, 1995). In the cups problem, a robot is placed on a linear
377                       Classifier Systems



                 40
                                                                                           short average
                                                                                        running average
                                                                                                 optimal
                 30                                                                              random


 steps to food   20


                 10


                 0
                      0           2000             4000               6000             8000                10000
                                                           problems



                          Figure 21.7 ZCS performance in Woods7: The “short average” plot is an average over
                          the 50 most recent trials. The running average curve is over all past trials.


                          grid. The robot can do one of three things: It can move left, move right, or attempt
                          to pick up a cup if it is standing above one. The sensory abilities of the robot are
                          quite limited and are restricted to exactly four bits of information:

                             • Is there a cup to the immediate left of the robot?

                             • Is there a cup to the immediate right of the robot?

                             • Did the robot collide with a wall on the left?

                             • Did the robot collide with a wall on the right?

                              The robot cannot “see” walls. It knows that it is near one only if it runs into
                          it. To make things worse, the robot cannot see what is directly beneath it, so to
                          successfully pick up a cup, it must see it to one side, move on top of it, remember
                          that it is on top of it, and pick it up.
                              The robot doesn’t really know what any of these signals that it is receiving
                          mean. It doesn’t even know what the three possible control signals are. It just
                          receives inputs and can send some output. The goal that the robot must achieve
                          sounds amazingly simple: It must pick up two cups. But wait, it gets worse. The
                          robot never receives any sort of feedback until it picks up the second cup. Thus, in
                          order for the robot to know that it has done the right thing, it must go through an
                          extremely complex and specific sequence of actions.
                              The exact configuration of the robot’s world looks like

                                                               W..C*..CW
378   Classifier Systems



      where the “W” characters stand for walls, the “C” characters represent the cups, and
      the “*” is the robot’s initial location. For simplicity (and to keep the experiment
      consistent with the setup used by other researchers) the robot always starts out at
      the same location.
          Since the ZCS needs some form of memory in order to solve the problem, we
      will augment Wilson’s ZCS by incorporating a memory register into each classifier.
      This idea is similar to maintaining a message list, but is somewhat more compact
      in that we can specify the exact number of bits of memory to use in advance. The
      general scheme modifies the ZCS classifiers by making each have the form
                           condition:register:action:new register:strength.
      What this means is that the classifier is considered a match only if the condition
      matches the environment description returned from the detector and the current
      register value matches register . If this classifier is acted upon, then action is per-
      formed by the eﬀector, and the register is given the new value of new register. Thus,
      the classifiers can now be conditioned upon a certain memory being present and
      can also set the memory to a new value.
          We could have made the problem easier for the ZCS by having the detector
      return twice as much information: one string for the current state and another
      string for the previous state. Encoding the information in this way is exactly the
      information that the ZCS needs to solve the problem (i.e., is it now on top of a
      cup?). But by being given only the current state and a single bit of memory, the
      ZCS must actually learn what feature is important to remember. Thus, how to
      remember is built into the system but what to remember is entirely up to the ZCS.
          While it would be easier for the ZCS if we just gave it the information that
      it needs, it is educational to use the memory register instead. Why? For many
      problems, human designers simply do not know what information is required to
      solve a problem. By giving the ZCS the ability to form its own memories, we have
      removed one more design decision from the human. In a sense, we are forcing the
      ZCS to learn what to learn.
          For this experiment I used 100 classifiers and a single bit for the register. As
      stated earlier, the problem requires four bits for the detector, and two bits for a
      control action (“10” means move left, “01” means move right, and “11” means
      pick up). Every experiment consisted of many trials, where a trial consists of
      starting the robot in the initial configuration and letting the whole thing run until
      both cups are picked up. In a typical experiment, the first 100 or so trials were
      extremely ineﬃcient and often took hundreds of steps before the robot managed
      to pick up both cups simply by dumb luck. Afterward, the ZCS would eventually
      find a relatively eﬃcient technique. Sometimes the ZCS could only learn how to
      pick up cups that were approached from the left side. Other times, the ZCS would
      only pick up the rightmost cup after running into the wall. Overall, the ZCS could
      usually be counted on to find a solution that took around ten steps or so.
379          Classifier Systems



                Every now and then, the ZCS would manage to discover the optimal solution that
             takes exactly seven steps. This solution, as learned by the ZCS, can be implemented
             with four classifiers that roughly correspond to:
                • If there is a cup to the left, then move to the left and turn the register on.
                • If there is a cup to the right, then move to the right and turn the register on.
                • If there is nothing to the left or right and the register is on, then pick up and
                  turn the register oﬀ.
                • If there is nothing to the left or right and the register is oﬀ, then move right.
             Thus, the ZCS learned to associate the register with the fact that the robot was on
             top of a cup.

                 For all three example problems, the ZCS essentially had to learn a detailed path
             through a feature space. Somewhat counterintuitive is that each step in the path is
             learned in reverse order. When the ZCS just happens to find itself near a goal and
             when it just happens to make the right move to get to that goal, then that single
             classifier is reinforced. This has the eﬀect of strengthening one classifier so that if
             the ZCS is in a similar situation, then it will be more likely to take the right path.
             But the bucket brigade algorithm (both implicit and explicit versions) will share
             strength with other classifiers that assist in getting the system back to the state
             that was near the goal. In this way, a classifier system learns how to make the very
             last step of a journey, followed by the next-to-last step, then the third-to-last step,
             and so on, ultimately learning as many partial solutions as possible in order to get
             to the final goal.


21.5 Further Exploration
             Two programs were used for all experiments in this chapter. The first one is named
             simply zcs, and it can be used to train a classifier system to find food in an arbitrary
             environment. The second program, zcscup is a slight modification of the first
             program that I wrote especially for the cups problem. Both programs take identical
             options, as shown in Table 21.2.
                The -specs option is used to specify a file that describes what the ZCS’s world
             looks like. The specification files have a very simple text format that is obvious once
             you look at some of the examples. For the ZCS parameters described in Table 21.1,
             -lrate corresponds to β, -drate to γ, -trate to τ , -grate to ρ, and -cover to
             φ. All of the other options have the same meaning as they had in the GA examples
             from the previous chapter.
                For all three experiments reported, the parameters used were the same as the
             default values for the programs. In fact, these values are identical to values reported
380         Classifier Systems



                 Option Name        Option Type      Option Meaning
                 -specs             string           file with world specs
                 -steps             integer          number of simulated steps
                 -seed              integer          random seed for initial state
                 -size              integer          population size
                 -sinit             double           initial classifier strength
                 -lrate             double           BB learning rate
                 -drate             double           BB discount rate
                 -trate             double           tax rate for strength reduce
                 -crate             double           GA crossover rate
                 -mrate             double           GA mutation rate
                 -grate             double           GA invocation rate
                 -cover             double           covering factor
                 -wild              double           probability of # in cover
                 -avelen            integer          length of windowed average
                 -inv               switch           invert colors?
                 -xmag              integer          magnification factor for X Windows
                 -term              string           how to plot points


                            Table 21.2   Command-line options for zcs and zcscup


            by Wilson. The only notable setting is that zcscup required a lower crossover rate
            (-crate 0.1) to solve the cups problem. This is most likely due to the “brittle-
            ness” of the problem, since crossing in this case will improve solutions only under
            extremely rare conditions.


21.6 Further Reading
             Awad, E. M. (1996). Building expert systems: Principles, procedures, and appli-
             cations. Minneapolis/St.Paul: West/Wadsworth.
             Clark, W. R. (1995). At war within: The double-edged sword of immunity. New
             York: Oxford University Press.
             Farmer, J. D., Packard, N. H., & Perelson, A. S. (1986). The immune system,
             adaptation & learning. Physica D, 22(1–3): 187–204.
             Holland, J. H. (1976). Adaptation. In R. Rosen & F. M. Snell (Eds.), Progress in
             theoretical biology IV (pp. 263–293). New York: Academic Press.
             Holland, J. H., Holyoak, K. J., Nisbett, R. E., & Thagard, P. R. (1989). Induction:
             Processes of inference, learning and discovery. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
381   Classifier Systems



       Kaelbling, L. P. (Ed.). (1996). Recent advances in reinforcement learning. Boston:
       Kluwer Academic.
       Lumsden, C. J. & Wilson, E. O. (1981). Genes, mind, and culture: The coevolu-
       tionary process. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
       Wesson, R. (1991).    Beyond natural selection.    Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford
       Books/MIT Press.
       Whitehead, S. D. & Lin, L.-J. (1995). Reinforcement learning of a non-Markov
       decision process. Art. Intell., 73(1–2): 271–306.
       Wilson, S. W. (1994). ZCS: A zeroth level classifier system. Evol. Comp., 2(1):
       1–18.
22   Neural Networks and Learning




          As a net is made up of a series of ties, so everything in this world is connected by a
       series of ties. If anyone thinks that the mesh of a net is an independent, isolated thing,
           he is mistaken. It is called a net because it is made up of a series of interconnected
            meshes, and each mesh has its place and responsibility in relation to other meshes.
                                                                                      — Buddha


        If the brain were so simple we could understand it, we would be so simple we couldn’t.
                                                                             — Lyall Watson


                                                              I bet the human brain is a kludge.
                                                                             — Marvin Minsky




     A     short list of some mundane tasks that humans can eﬀortlessly perform in-
     cludes recognizing faces, understanding and speaking in a native language, walking
     upright while chewing gum, and manipulating objects with one or both hands. All
     of these tasks are easy to ignore, even when we do them simultaneously, most likely
     because we can do them without too much conscious thought involved. Despite this
     fact, “simple” tasks such as these represent some of the most challenging problems
     in computer science. Much has been spoken and written of how tasks that are
     “machine easy”—performing precise and complicated symbolic manipulation—are
     “human hard.” The flip side to this is that many “human easy” tasks are “machine
     hard” since it is diﬃcult to algorithmically describe such everyday skills.
         Consider the hardware involved. Typical home computers can perform hundreds
     of millions of operations in a single second, while a single neuron can merely oscillate
     at a fraction of the same speed. Individual transistors that make up a CPU can
     propagate signals at speeds limited only by the speed of light and the physical
     distances between them, which is why silicon chips etched on smaller scales can
     be driven to higher clock speeds. On the other hand, neurons propagate electrical
     signals through a chemical medium that is sluggish in comparison. In fact, a single
     neuron can look clumsy compared with a pocket calculator.
384   Neural Networks and Learning



          How is it, then, that brains can easily do things that defy the abilities of the most
      sophisticated computers? The real power of the brain lies in massive parallelism.
      While a typical CPU has around 5 million transistors and a typical home computer
      around 100 million (108 ) transistors, the human brain has a staggering 1011 neurons,
      each of which may be connected to thousands of other neurons for a total of 1013 to
      1014 synaptic connections. It is through this massive parallelism and connectivity
      that the human brain is able to perform such impressive feats of computation.
          Using the brain as inspiration, researchers are now designing new types of com-
      puting devices that have many of the qualities contained in natural networks of
      neurons. Such devices, known as artificial neural networks or “neural nets,” pos-
      sess many simple processing units that are massively interconnected with each other.
      This departure from more traditional computer science methods has many potential
      benefits. First and foremost, neural nets are not programmed in the usual sense
      of the word but instead are trained with a learning algorithm that modifies neu-
      ral connections based on the net’s experience. Changing the way a neural net is
      wired changes the way it responds to inputs. Thus, the solutions to many diﬀerent
      problems may diﬀer only in the specifics of how a neural net is connected. By au-
      tomating the whole process with a learning algorithm, researchers have been able
      to train neural nets to do tasks that have previously defied traditional approaches.
          The second major benefit of using neural nets resides in massive parallelism.
      In a neural net, each neuron is conceptually identical. Each receives inputs and
      produces an output. The output response of a single artificial neuron is typically
      so simple that it can be computed with a hand-held calculator. If we think of
      each artificial neuron as a grossly simplified computer, it becomes possible to build
      hardware versions where all calculations are performed in parallel. This way, instead
      of simulating the same operation thousands of times in succession, each artificial
      neuron can perform its own calculation in parallel with all others in the network,
      thus reaping the same benefit that the brain does by doing many simple things at
      once.
          In Chapter 18 we examined feedback neural networks whose weights were deter-
      mined according to simple rules and left fixed. In this chapter, we will be considering
      feedforward neural networks having the property that no sequence of connections
      among neurons forms a loop, which means that no neuron can feed back directly or
      indirectly to itself. This architectural simplification makes it easier to design algo-
      rithms for automatically changing the weights. For example, in the case of Hebbian
      learning (see Section 18.2 on page 312), it was possible to set weights according
      to how the neurons were supposed to interact with each other. This chapter will
      highlight more general rules that extend the basic idea. The result is a technique
      for performing supervised learning that allows weights to be dynamically modified
      as new information is acquired by the neural network.
          The history of neural networks is actually quite interesting, since the topic as
      a research area has had many high and low points. We will begin this chapter
385           Neural Networks and Learning




                                                                                         “square”


                                                                                         “circle”


                                                                                         “triangle”




                 Encoding                                     Classification
      Image                           Perceptron Input                            Perceptron Output



                                 Figure 22.1     A stylized picture of a perceptron


              with an introduction to the first feedforward neural network ever used, examine the
              problems that exposed its weaknesses, rediscover an extension that solved many of
              the earlier problems, consider some numerical examples, explore how neural net-
              works can form internal representations of an input pattern, and finish oﬀ with
              some example applications.


22.1 Pattern Classification and the Perceptron
              To summarize our exposure to the history of artificial neural networks so far, Chap-
              ter 18 introduced the McCulloch-Pitts neuron, originally proposed in the 1940s,
              and the Hopfield-Tank feedback neural network, an invention of the 1980s. Obvi-
              ously there are some holes in this history. One of the greatest periods of activity in
              neural network research was in the 1960s. During this time, research was centered
              on Frank Rosenblatt’s perceptron, a type of pattern classification device based on
              Rosenblatt’s model of visual perception.
                 The basic idea behind the perceptron is illustrated in Figure 22.1, which shows
              that a perceptron can consist of multiple inputs and multiple outputs. Perceptrons
              are an example of feedforward networks because, unlike feedback networks, the
              activation of the network always propagates in one direction, starting from the
              inputs and ending at the outputs. The inputs are typically understood to represent
              visual information that is presented to an eyeball-like device, while the outputs
              represent the perception of the visual stimulus. For example, as seen in the figure,
              when the perceptron inputs are presented with a circular shape, the output with the
              label “circle” becomes activated, indicating the content of the input. This general
              type of problem goes by the name of pattern classification since the goal is to label or
              classify many diﬀerent patterns into a smaller number of classes. The problem can
386   Neural Networks and Learning



      be conceptually simplified by reducing the number of classes to two. A perceptron
      that needs to classify all objects into two classes needs only a single output. When
      activated, the output indicates that the inputs form a member of the one class,
      such as the class of circles, while inactivity indicates that the inputs did not form
      a member, that is, the input is a member of the class of non-circles. Thinking of
      the perceptron in this way allows us to simplify things considerably by breaking the
      multiple-output perceptron in Figure 22.1 into three separate perceptrons, each of
      which has a single output for its respective class.
         Mathematically, with multiple inputs and a single output (all of which take 0/1
      binary values), the output of a simple perceptron is described by the function
                                             9 n            :
                                               !
                                      y=Θ          wi xi + b ,
                                                   i=1

      where xi is a binary input, Θ(x) is the unit step function that is equal to 1 if x > 0
      and 0 otherwise, wi represents the synaptic strength of the connection from input
      i to the output, and b is a threshold or bias term.1 For convenience, you can think
      of the wi terms as being the lines in Figure 22.1 that connect the inputs to the
      outputs. The perceptron “fires” with a nonzero output whenever the weighted sum
      of the inputs multiplied by the weights is greater than the negation of the threshold.
          “Neurons” in the perceptron consist of the outputs. We don’t consider the inputs
      to be neurons because they simply pass information forward without processing it in
      any way. By way of comparison, the outputs form a weighted sum of the incoming
      signals and pass it through activation functions, thus performing a simple type of
      computation.
          Clearly, a perceptron is a special type of function that maps binary inputs to
      a single binary output. To better understand how functions are represented by a
      perceptron, we will now consider some general features of binary functions and one
      simple example function in particular. If a perceptron has n inputs, then there
      are exactly 2n diﬀerent binary patterns that could be presented as input to the
      perceptron. For example, with two inputs there are four diﬀerent input patterns:
                                                                                n
      (0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0), and (1, 1). With 2n patterns, there are exactly 22 functional
      mappings from the input pattern space to the space of binary numbers because
      each of the 2n patterns can be labeled with either a 1 or a 0. With the two-input
      example, one such mapping could be the binary AND function, which is equal to 1
      if and only if both inputs are 1.
          Figure 22.2 shows three diﬀerent ways of looking at a perceptron that represents
      the AND function. In Figure 22.2a we see weights and bias values that result in
      a perceptron behaving like an AND circuit, which you can check by verifying that
      x1 + x2 − 1.5 > 0 only when both binary inputs are 1. In Figure 22.2b, the gray
         1 The equation above is nearly identical to the McCulloch-Pitts neuron described in Figure 18.2

      on page 310.
387              Neural Networks and Learning


                                                      x1 + x2 − 1.5                 x2
                  b = −1.5
                                                                                    (0, 1)             (1, 1)
                                                                                                   w
                                                                            x1
  w1 = 1              w2 = 1
                                                      (1, 1)            (1,0)

                                                                                                         x1

      x1                x2           x2     (0,1)              (0, 0)               (0, 0)             (1, 0)


           (a)                                      (b)                                      (c)


                 Figure 22.2 Three views of a perceptron solving the AND problem: (a) the perceptron
                 with weights and bias shown; (b) the decision plane shown in three dimensions; (c) the
                 decision line shown in two dimensions. Figure adapted from (Hertz et al., 1991)


                 region is a portion of the plane defined by x1 + x2 − 1.5, which we will refer to
                 as the decision plane. Notice that the decision plane intersects the (x1 , x2 ) plane,
                 forming a diagonal line. The gray section of the decision plane corresponds to the
                 region where x1 + x2 − 1.5 > 0 is true, while the region on the other side of the
                 diagonal line (i.e., moving closer to (0, 0)) corresponds to where x1 + x2 − 1.5 < 0.
                 Exactly on the diagonal line is where x1 + x2 − 1.5 = 0 is true, which is more clearly
                 seen in Figure 22.2c. This diagonal line in two dimensions forms a linear decision
                 boundary such that everything on one side belongs to one class and everything on
                 the other side forms another class. Hence, having a perceptron compute the AND
                 function is simply a matter of setting the weights such that a line separates (1,1)
                 from the other three points. Implementing a perceptron that computes another
                 function simply puts the decision boundary somewhere else.
                     In addition to the diagonal decision boundary, Figure 22.2c shows a vector la-
                 beled w that is formed by taking the two weights and the bias term to make a
                 three-dimensional vector with components [1, 1, −1.5]T . The decision boundary
                 displayed in Figure 22.2c can be seen to be perpendicular to w. Unfortunately,
                 Figure 22.2c can show only two of the three dimensions, so the third component of
                 w is essentially lost in the image. Nevertheless, it is often useful to visualize the
                 decision boundary in this way.2 In particular, when considering how small changes
                 in the weight vector change the input-output response of a perceptron, it is crucial
                 to think of all of the weight and bias terms of a perceptron as one composite object.
                     Now that we have seen how mappings can be represented by a perceptron, we
                 can now look at the more interesting issue of how to automatically find a set of
                 weights that implements a mapping of our choice. In the usual case, we may not
                   2 Section 13.3, starting on page 207, gives a geometrical interpretation of the inner product,

                 which may be helpful in visualizing the eﬀect that weight vectors have on inputs.
388   Neural Networks and Learning



       Neural Networks as Universal Computers                            Digression 22.1

        A network of McCulloch-Pitts neurons can form a universal computer if wired cor-
        rectly. The proof is actually quite simple. We know that home PCs with infinite
        memory are universal computers as well. If we can show that a neural network can
        emulate a home PC, then the proof is complete.

        Every modern computer is made from silicon chips that have millions of transistors
        etched onto them. The transistors form logical digital gates such as the AND and
        OR functions. The NOT operation is another logical function that turns 1s to 0s and
        0s to 1s. With only AND and NOT gates, or just OR and NOT gates, it is possible
        to emulate any conceivable digital circuit. (Figure 22.6 on page 393 should give you
        a taste of how this can be done.) Therefore, if we can just show that a neural net
        can emulate AND and NOT or OR and NOT, then we know that a neural network is
        computationally universal.

        We have already seen in this chapter how an AND circuit can be implemented as a
        perceptron. Emulating an OR circuit requires that a perceptron decision boundary
        separate (0, 0) from the other points. To compute a NOT gate, one only needs a
        weight of -1 and a threshold of 12 in a simple perceptron. Therefore, a McCulloch-
        Pitts neural network or a multilayer perceptron with feedback connections could be
        wired up to emulate any conceivable digital circuit, including a home computer. This
        proves that neural networks are computationally universal, with the one caveat that
        total memory will be finite if we are limited to a finite number of neurons.




      have a specific function like the AND function in mind, but will instead have a
      number of example inputs and target values that we want the perceptron to classify
      correctly. Our goal is to find some way of changing the behavior of a perceptron
      when it works incorrectly. In other words, we want it to learn based on feedback
      that a teacher would give it. In this setup, if you want a perceptron to recognize
      squares, then you would present the perceptron with labeled data that consist of
      images along with the correct class. The squares will be labeled as squares and
      circles, triangles, and other shapes as non-squares. With enough examples, in time
      the perceptron could learn to distinguish squares from non-squares on its own. And
      if things go truly well, your perceptron may even be able to generalize by correctly
      recognizing squares that it has never seen before.
          The perceptron learning algorithm is more rigorously described by the following
      procedure, which is performed repeatedly until all patterns in a training set are
      correctly classified. The first step is to apply the input pattern to the perceptron.
      If the output of the perceptron is equal to the target value, t, then we move on
      to the next pattern. But if the perceptron’s output diﬀers from the target output,
389   Neural Networks and Learning



      then we adjust the weights by

                                  winew   =    wiold + η(t − y)xi and
                                   bnew   =    bold + η(t − y),

      where η is a very small constant referred to as the learning rate.3 The eﬀect on the
      weights is relatively simple to understand. Assume for the moment that xi is equal
      to 1 (if it is equal to 0, then the learning rule will not change the weight). The
      weight change is always proportional to (t − y). If t is 1 and y is 0, then the weight
      is increased; otherwise the weight is reduced. In other words, if we want the output
      to be on when it is oﬀ, then making the weights more positive will help make that
      happen the next time around. But if the output is on when it is supposed to be oﬀ,
      pushing the weight in a more negative direction will reduce the perceptron’s ability
      to fire.
          As a disclaimer, the biological plausibility of the perceptron learning rule is
      somewhat debatable, since the idea of all biological neurons having target values is
      somewhat suspect. Nevertheless, the perceptron learning rule does resemble a form
      of behavioral adaptation, with the error term (t − y) representing a form of negative
      feedback.
          Another way of visualizing how the weights change over time is to think about
      how a perceptron can make mistakes. If the perceptron misclassifies a pattern,
      then it is natural to describe the error by E = (t − y)2 , which gets larger the
      more y diﬀers from t. Ignoring for the moment the fact that both y and t are
      supposed to have binary values, the function E = (t − y)2 is a quadratic function
      that defines a single valleylike surface in a multidimensional space. Since y is a
      function of the weights in the perceptron, we can look at how E changes when the
      weights are changed. Figure 22.3 shows the error surface with the optimal weight
      vector corresponding to the lowest point of the surface. The perceptron learning
      algorithm is a special case of a more general algorithm, known as steepest descent ,
      that attempts to minimize error functions by always moving in a downhill direction.
      By thinking of the perceptron learning rule in this way, we can see how the weight
      changes correspond to taking a small step toward the bottom of the error valley.
      The step size is determined by η and the direction is determined by the negative
      feedback in (t − y). Later on in this chapter, when we examine more complicated
      feedforward neural networks, you should keep this image in mind because it applies
      to the most complicated types of networks.
          Rosenblatt and others showed that if a set of weights existed that solved a
      problem, then the perceptron learning algorithm would always find the correct
      weights in a finite number of steps. This positive result caused a sense of euphoria
      among neural researchers in the 1960s because it seemed to imply that perceptrons
        3 This learning rule actually was independently discovered many times and, as a result, it is

      known by several diﬀerent names, such as the delta rule, the adaline rule, the Widrow-Hoﬀ rule,
      and the LMS rule.
390           Neural Networks and Learning



                                    Error




                                                                                   w2

                                     wold
                                             wnew            wideal

                             w1                        ∆w



              Figure 22.3 The delta rule as a steepest descent step in the error surface. Figure
              adapted from (Caudill & Butler, 1990).


              could be used to magically solve all types of previously intractable problems. Think
              about it: Distinguishing circles from squares is one thing, but imagine that one
              could automatically distinguish dogs from cats, people you know from people you
              don’t, or enemy aircraft from friendly aircraft. With this kind of discriminatory
              power all sorts of tasks that require human intervention could be automated. The
              problem with this conclusion is that success of the perceptron learning algorithm is
              conditioned on the existence of a solution in the first place. As it turns, out there
              are many extremely simple problems that can be proved to be beyond the powers
              of a perceptron.


22.2 Linear Inseparability
              The most famous example of a simple problem that cannot be solved by a perceptron
              is the exclusive-or (XOR) problem. In the simplest version there are two binary
              inputs. The target output response is equal to 1 if and only if exactly one of the
              inputs is a 1. XOR is equivalent to the notion that the sum of the inputs is odd. A
              more general version of this problem is known as the n-bit parity problem, where
              the goal is to classify inputs according to whether they have an even or odd number
              of 1s; thus, the XOR problem is just a two-bit odd parity problem.
391            Neural Networks and Learning


      x2                                 x2                                   x2
      (0, 1)    (1, 1)                   (0, 1)     (1, 1)                    (0, 1)     (1, 1)




      (0, 0)    (1, 0)                   (0, 0)     (1, 0)                    (0, 0)     (1, 0)
                         x1                                  x1                                   x1
           (a) OR                             (b) AND                              (c) XOR

                 Figure 22.4    Three decision boundaries: Only the first two are linearly separable.



                   Figure 22.4 shows three diﬀerent binary mappings and their associated decision
               boundaries. The first two problems, OR and AND, can be solved by a perceptron
               precisely because it is possible to draw a single line that divides the black points
               from the white points. For the XOR problem this is clearly not possible. OR and
               AND have the property that they are linearly separable while XOR is said to be
               linearly inseparable.
                   While Figure 22.4c shows that the patterns in the XOR problem cannot be
               correctly divided by a single line, thus making the point that perceptrons are ill-
               suited for some problems, it is still instructive to consider the more general n-bit
               parity problem to get an appreciation for some of the issues involved. The parity
               problem has the property that if you flip a single bit in an n-bit string, then the
               resulting string will always be in the opposite class from the first string. Why?
               Well, if the first string had an even number of 1s, then flipping a 0 to a 1 or a
               1 to a 0 is going to change the number of 1s to an odd number. In other words,
               input patterns that are close to each other in a Euclidean sense are far away from
               each other in terms of their class. This means that in order to classify parity strings
               correctly, you can’t just look at the inputs as individual bits; instead, you must look
               at the whole input string as one object in order to detect the higher-order patterns.

                  As mentioned earlier, the 1960s saw an almost reckless optimism in the faith that
               some practitioners had for perceptrons. Toward the end of the decade there was
               something of a backlash as many researchers began to voice skepticism. In 1969,
               Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert published a book, entitled Perceptrons, that
               dealt the final blow to perceptrons as a research topic. In their book, they demon-
               strated that whole classes of problems were insolvable by any simple perceptron
               with any learning algorithm. Minsky and Papert also added some much-needed
               mathematical rigor to the area by giving detailed proofs for their claims. The eﬀect
392            Neural Networks and Learning


      x2                                 x2                                  x2
      (0, 1)    (1, 1)                   (0, 1)     (1, 1)                   (0, 1)     (1, 1)




      (0, 0)    (1, 0)                   (0, 0)     (1, 0)                   (0, 0)     (1, 0)
                         x1                                  x1                                  x1
           (a) OR                          (b) NAND                               (c) XOR


               Figure 22.5 Forming XOR as a composition. The XOR set in (c) can be defined as the
               intersection of the sets in (a) and (b)


               on the neural network community was nearly instantaneous. Research into neural
               networks would still continue, but it would take the area almost two decades to
               recoverer.


22.3 Multilayer Perceptrons
               The fact that perceptrons cannot compute an XOR function clearly indicates that
               they have limited use in application areas; however, as a theoretical tool, perceptrons
               serve a useful role as the simplest example of what is now generally referred to as
               a feedforward neural network. We will see that the outright dismissal of neural
               networks in the late 1960s was in fact premature and a case of throwing out the
               baby with the bathwater. But first, let’s look back to the XOR problem so that we
               can come up with a way to solve it with a more complicated type of perceptron.
                   Figure 22.5 shows another way of thinking about what it means for a point to
               be in the set for which XOR is true. If NAND is the set of all points that are not
               in AND, then XOR can be seen as the intersection between the sets defined by OR
               and NAND. This is an important clue to how a neural network should solve this
               problem. We know that a perceptron can compute the OR function, and NAND
               appears to be linearly separable as well. Hence, one perceptron could be wired to
               compute OR while another is used to compute NAND. If both of these perceptrons
               fire at the same time when given the same input, then we know that the input
               pattern belongs in the set defined by XOR.
                   Figure 22.6a shows a diagram for a digital circuit that computes XOR by first
               computing OR and NAND. In Figure 22.6b we see the same circuit, but this time
               it is realized as a multilayer perceptron (MLP) that computes intermediate values
               in order to compute the final value. Using multiple layers is the key to making
393         Neural Networks and Learning



                                                             1.0
               OR                                                          -0.5

                                                                                   1.0
                                                                    1.0
                                 AND                                                     -1.5

                                                                    -1.0
                                                                                   1.0
              NAND                                                         1.5
                                                             -1.0

               (a)                                                         (b)

            Figure 22.6 A two-layer perceptron solves XOR: (a) the solution as a digital circuit,
            and (b) weight and bias values for a perceptron that emulates the XOR circuit



            perceptrons compute more powerful functions since multiple perceptrons can be
            composed through one another. Many researchers knew in the 1960s that this was
            the way to go in order to form more complicated neural nets. The problem was that
            no one knew how to train the things. Training the weights to an output neuron was
            never a problem, since the delta rule could always be used to compute appropriate
            weight changes. But how should one go about changing the weights that go into the
            “hidden neurons” in the middle of the network? The delta rule makes changes to
            the weights that are proportional to the diﬀerence between the target output value
            and the actual output value. We know what the actual output is for these hidden
            neurons, but we have no idea what the target values should be. In fact, it’s not
            even clear what it means for hidden neurons to have target values.



22.4 Backpropagation

            The solution to the problem of how to train hidden neurons had to be rediscovered
            several diﬀerent times before the bulk of the research community took notice. The
            problem was solved somewhat independently by several individuals and groups: A.
            E. Bryson and Y.-C. Ho; Paul Werbos; D. B. Parker; and David Rumelhart, G.
            Hinton, and R. Williams. Rumelhart and his collaborators published a two-volume
            book that gained widespread attention and was largely responsible for ushering in
            a renaissance of research. The key to the solution is twofold: Replace the unit step
            function with a smooth sigmoidal function and generalize the delta rule so that error
            signals are passed backward through the hidden nodes. The resulting method for
394         Neural Networks and Learning



      x1                                                                                               y1
                        u11                      z1                      v11
                                    u12                                              v12

                                    u21                                              v21

                        u22                      z2                      v22
      x2                                                                                               y2

       xi               uji                      zj                     vkj                       yk

                                  Figure 22.7      A labeled multilayer perceptron


            computing weight changes is known as backpropagation 4 (or “backprop”) because
            of the manner in which the error signals are passed backward through a network.
                Before we look into the learning algorithm, we need to get some notational
            conventions out of the way. Figure 22.7 shows a multilayer perceptron with a single
            hidden layer. As before, the inputs into the system are denoted by the xi terms and
            the outputs by the yk terms, but this time there are hidden neurons whose outputs
            we will annotate with zj terms. Each of these neurons computes a weighted sum
            and passes it through a sigmoidal activation function, g(x).
                To simplify the notation even further, we are going to ignore the threshold terms
            that were used earlier.5 Since we have multiple layers of weights, it is notationally
            just easier to refer to them by two diﬀerent base variables, uji and vkj . But also
            note that there is no reason why you can’t use a three- or thirty-layer perceptron
            as well. We are using the two-layer example (i.e., two layers of weights) of an MLP
            just because it is the simplest network with multiple layers. With these rules and
            caveats in place, the feedforward pass of a two-layer MLP is compactly described
            by                       ⎛           ⎞     ⎛          9          :⎞
                                       !                 !         !
                              yk = g ⎝    vkj zj ⎠ = g ⎝    vkj g      uji xi ⎠ .
                                           j                   j           i


               4 Some practitioners of neural networks refer to the “backpropagation learning algorithm” or

            “backpropagation networks.” Both terms are slightly incorrect since “backpropagation” really just
            refers to the method for computing the error gradient of a network. If you don’t know what that
            last sentence means, don’t worry about it. The point is that backpropagation is neither a type of
            network nor a learning algorithm, but a mathematical operation.
               5 We can do this without losing any mathematical details because the threshold term can be

            simulated by having an extra input that always has the value of 1. The weights coming from this
            auxiliary neuron play the same role that the threshold did in the earlier sections.
395           Neural Networks and Learning


       1                                                     0.25




      0.5




       0                                                       0
        -10   -5            0           5           10          -10         -5            0         5          10

                         (a)                                                        (b)


                         Figure 22.8        A sigmoidal activation function (a) and its derivative (b)


                  As for the activation function, g(x), Figure 22.8a shows a plot of the sigmoid
              function that we first saw in Figure 18.5 (page 320). In this chapter we need to
              consider the mathematical properties of the sigmoid function in greater detail. In
              Figure 22.8b, the first derivative6 of the sigmoid is shown. Notice that the tails of the
              derivative, where it goes to 0, correspond exactly to where the sigmoid saturates at
              either 0 or 1. Moreover, the highest point of the derivative is where the rate of change
              in the sigmoid is at its greatest. The sigmoid function is mathematically described
              by g(x) = 1/(1 + exp(−x)). Computing the derivative of g(x) turns out to be very
              easy because for this case it just happens to be equal to g ′ (x) = g(x)(1 − g(x)).
              Since this derivative is always computed with respect to a particular neuron, for
              example, an output neuron yk or a hidden neuron zj , it is more convenient to refer
              to it as yk′ = yk (1 − yk ) or zj′ = zj (1 − zj ), respectively.
                  We are now finally ready to see how backprop works. Our goal here is to fill in
              the blanks in the equations below:
                                                 unew
                                                  ji     =    uold
                                                               ji + η∆uji and
                                                  new          old
                                                 vkj     =    vkj  + η∆vkj .
              That is, we need to come up with a way for specifying how to calculate weight
              changes so that learning can occur. The problem is: What should ∆uji and ∆vkj
              be? The derivation of backprop can be a bit intimidating at first, but understanding
              it requires nothing more than knowledge of how summations and derivatives work.
              In the derivation that follows, I will primarily attempt to give an intuitive feel for
              how it works, and only then will we make things more mathematically rigorous.
                   6 For an introduction to derivatives see Section 11.2 (page 165) or refer to a good calculus text.
396   Neural Networks and Learning



          Let’s start with ∆vkj since these are the weights that connect to the output
      neurons that have target values. Earlier, we saw that the weight changes for a
      simple perceptron were calculated as the product of the input to the neuron, xi ,
      and an error term, (t − y). Calculating ∆vkj is very similar except that we now
      need to account for the fact that the activation function, g(x), is continuous instead
      of discrete. In the case of the step function, Θ(x), knowing the value of the output
      tells you almost nothing about what the input was, that is, if Θ(x) is 1, then we
      know only that x is positive. But in the case of the sigmoid function, g(x), knowing
      its output tells you a lot about its input. To see why, recall that the derivative of a
      function yields information about how the output changes when the input changes.
      If the derivative, g ′ (x), is large, then we know that the input was near the threshold
      boundary and that changing x just a little could change g(x). But if g ′ (x) is very
      close to 0, then g(x) is saturated near one of the extremes—producing something
      close to 0 or 1.
          In this light, the expression g ′ (x)(t − y) contains many pieces of information. If
      it is close to 0, then we know that t is very close to y, g ′ (x) is close to 0, or both
      of these conditions are true. In the first case, we don’t want to change the way
      that the neuron fired because it gave the correct response. In the second case, the
      output may or may not be correct, but the weights are such that they would have
      to be changed a great deal in order to change the neuron’s response; thus, perhaps
      it is better to leave them alone, since drastic changes could adversely aﬀect other
      portions of the network. In the last case, with both terms close to 0, the neuron
      has fired correctly and is doing so unambiguously.
          Now consider the opposite case, when g ′ (x)(t − y) is far from 0. This tells us two
      important pieces of information. First, we know that the neuron fired incorrectly.
      The sign of g ′ (x)(t − y) will tell us which way the neuron was wrong. (Did it output
      something close to 1 when it was supposed to yield a 0, or the other way around?)
      And with g ′ (x) far from 0, we know that the neuron is firing near the middle of its
      activation area, that is, near 21 . This is very important. It means that changing the
      weights just a little bit can yield a dramatic improvement.
          Putting all of this together, we can think of g ′ (x)(t − y) as supplying us with
      the error correction information. As such, for an output neuron yk , we will use the
      Greek letter delta with a subscript to represent the error correction information for
      output k, δyk = yk′ (tk − yk ), with the k subscript being used on all of the terms to
      indicate that we are talking about a specific output neuron with a specific target
      value. The weight change, ∆vkj , is now computed very similarly to the way the
      perceptron update rule worked. We set ∆vkj equal to zj δyk , because zj is the input
      connected to yk via vkj . Intuitively, this is very similar to the perceptron update
      rule, xi (t − y), but now all of the error correction information is in δyk instead of
      just (t − y).
          We now turn our attention to the more diﬃcult question of how to compute the
      updates for the hidden weights, ∆uji . The short answer is that we will ultimately
397        Neural Networks and Learning



      x1   u11                                                                       δy1     y1
                         z1 = g(x1 u11 + x2 u12 )                                   v11

                                                                                    v21
           u12                         δz1 = z1′ × (δy1 v11 + δy2 v21 )
      x2                                                                             δy2     y2


             (a)                                                              (b)


           Figure 22.9    The MLP (a) feedforward pass compared with (b) the backpropagation
           pass


           compute another delta term, δzj , for the hidden neurons, which lets us set ∆uji
           equal to xi δzj , but this requires us to figure out what δzj should be. Since each
           hidden neuron, zj , sends its output to the yk neurons via the vkj weights, each
           hidden neuron can potentially contribute something to all of the yk neurons. In
           other words, a hidden neuron’s error correction term needs to be a function of the
           error correction terms that were calculated for the neurons that it connects to. The
           value of this term is equal to
                                                       !
                                             δzj = zj′    vkj δyk .
                                                          k

           Once again, the zj′ portion of the expression comes from the fact that we need to
           know how changing the net input into zj changes its output. The summation takes
           all of the error correction terms from the output layer and sums them, weighted by
           the connection strengths.
               Figure 22.9 shows both the forward and backward calculations for a single hidden
           neuron. We are already familiar with the forward pass in Figure 22.9a; however,
           the backward pass shown in Figure 22.9b illustrates how backprop is actually a
           reversed form of the forward pass. In the forward pass we are computing activation
           values, while in the backward pass we are computing correction terms. The forward
           pass goes left to right while the backward pass goes right to left. In each case,
           the value is calculated as part of a weighted sum of the terms that were computed
           in the earlier stage. The neat thing about backprop is that it is an eﬃcient way
           to compute the error correction terms. It takes the same number of calculations
           as the forward pass, which is a surprising fact, considering that the values of the
           error correction terms are not as “obvious” to us as the activation values. Putting
           everything together, we now have

                       unew
                        ji  = uold
                               ji + ηxi δzj         and        new
                                                              vkj     old
                                                                   = vkj  + ηzj δyk , with
398          Neural Networks and Learning


                                                                      !
                             δyk = yk′ (tk − yk )   and   δzj = zj′       vkj δyk ,
                                                                      k

             which completes the update rule. Because of the generic way in which the δ terms
             are computed, backpropagation is also referred to as the generalized delta rule.
                 The error surface of an MLP can look like a rugged landscape with many peaks
             and valleys. The peaks correspond to high error values where the MLP is producing
             incorrect outputs, while the valleys correspond to lower error rates and better output
             response. The backpropagation algorithm always adjusts the weights such that a
             very small step is taken in a downhill direction. Referring back to Figure 22.3 on
             page 390, given enough time and with a small enough step size, the weight updates
             suggested by backprop will always find a local minimum of the error surface that
             is a valleylike region having the property that any small adjustment of the weights
             can only hurt the MLP’s performance. We know that a minimum will always be
             reached because each of the weight changes is always in the direction of the opposite
             of the error gradient. In other words, backprop is an eﬃcient method for calculating
             how a change in each of the weights will change the error of its performance.
                 Unfortunately, the error surface of a complicated MLP trained to approximate
             a complicated function will almost always have many local minima that are subop-
             timal. Finding the global minimum, that is, the best minimum in the error surface,
             is the ultimate goal, but there is no guarantee that backprop will actually find it.
             In Section 22.9 we will discuss some of these issues in greater detail. None of this
             means that MLPs are poor at solving problems. In fact, as we will see in the next
             section, MLPs can solve some interesting problems. We simply need to recognize
             that there is no such thing as a free lunch. Perceptrons can be proved to converge
             to the best solution possible precisely because they are capable of forming only a
             very limited set of approximations. MLPs are much more powerful from a function
             approximation point of view and lack global convergence because each MLP can
             approximate many diﬀerent types of functions.


22.5 Function Approximation
             We are now ready to see how multilayer perceptrons can be trained to mimic other
             functions by looking at three simple problems. In the first example we will use an
             MLP with two hidden neurons to learn the XOR problem. In the second example
             we will train an MLP to emulate the logistic map, a chaotic system first discussed
             in Chapter 10. For the third example, we will build a model of the Hénon map, a
             more complicated chaotic system that was introduced in Chapter 11. Afterward, we
             will constructively see how it is possible for an MLP to approximate any function.

             XOR For the XOR problem, we want the output of the MLP to correctly classify
             all possible input pairs. We start the MLP with random initial weights selected
399   Neural Networks and Learning


                  1




                  0


              1
                                                                                  1

                      x2
                                                                      x1
                                           0     0


           Figure 22.10    Output response surface of an MLP trained on the XOR data


      from a -1 to 1 range. Random initialization is necessary because starting an MLP
      with all weights 0 can cause learning to proceed very slowly or not at all. Using
      backpropagation (plus some minor improvements discussed in Section 22.9), we
      train the network by randomly picking one of the four training patterns, adjusting
      the weights, then randomly picking another pattern, and so on, until the error drops
      to something close to 0. The total modeling error in this case is equal to the average
      of the partial errors produced for each pattern,
                                                  4
                                               1! p
                                     Error =         (t − y p ),
                                               4 p=1

      where tp represents the target value for pattern p and y p is the MLP’s output
      response when it is passed the inputs for pattern p.
         After around 1000 or 2000 training iterations (which takes less than a second for
      my home PC to compute), the MLP has learned the correct mapping. Figure 22.10
      shows the output response of the trained MLP. The x- and y-axes of the plot are
      labeled x1 and x2 for the two inputs, while the z-axis shows the MLP’s output. As
      can be seen, the MLP has an output response that is elevated at the (0, 1) and (1,
      0) corners but is depressed at the (0, 0) and (1, 1) corners. In between the four
      corners, the MLP interpolates things with a smooth, basinlike depression.

      Logistic Map In the next example, the logistic map, we have a time series gen-
      erated from the system while it is in the chaotic regime. We will train an MLP
      with one input and one output. The input to the MLP will be some point from
      the generated time series, labeled xt , that has the target output of xt+1 . In other
400                      Neural Networks and Learning


              0.5                                                             1



              0.4
                                                                            0.75


              0.3


  RMS Error
                                                                        y    0.5

              0.2


                                                                            0.25
              0.1



               0                                                              0
                    0   20000   40000          60000   80000   100000              0   0.25         0.5   0.75      1
                                 Training Iterations                                                 x

                                 (a)                                                          (b)


                         Figure 22.11 Training an MLP on chaos: (a) the training error as a function of the
                         number of training iterations and (b) the target function (the logistic map) and the MLP’s
                         output response


                         words, given one point of the current portion of the chaotic series, we want the
                         MLP to predict what the next point will be. Notice that our target values are no
                         longer binary but may instead range anywhere from 0 to 1. Because of this, it is no
                         longer appropriate to use a sigmoidal activation function on the output. Instead,
                         we will simply use the identity function as a pseudo-activation function, that is,
                         g(x) = x. This requires us to modify the backpropagation procedure slightly, by
                         using g ′ (x) = 1 for the output neuron. The resulting values for the deltas are actu-
                         ally simpler than they were before, since δyk is now equal to (tk − yk ). Other than
                         this one change, everything stays the same.
                             Using two hidden neurons and 100 training patterns, Figure 22.11a shows the
                         root mean squared error as related to the number of training iterations. It takes
                         slightly more than 10,000 iterations to drop the error to an acceptable size, but I
                         allowed the training to continue for a solid 1 million iterations just to illustrate the
                         fact that learning slows down after a while.7 The output response of the trained
                         MLP is shown in Figure 22.11b. The solid line shows the actual target function,
                         xt+1 = 4xt (1 − xt ), and the predicted points from the data set. As can be seen, the
                         predictions are extremely accurate.
                            7 This example also illustrates that MLPs may learn very slowly at times. In terms of rate of

                         convergence, simple backprop is about the worst training procedure in existence. More sophisti-
                         cated techniques like quasi-Newton’s method or conjugate gradient oﬀer learning speeds hundreds
                         or even thousands of times faster. But these techniques are way beyond the scope of this book.
                         Readers wishing to know more about advanced optimization routines should consult one of the
                         neural network or numerical analysis texts in the bibliography.
401                Neural Networks and Learning


                            Actual                                            Predicted




         1                                                    1




  xt+1   0                                             xt+1   0




         -1                                                   -1




              -1              0          1                          -1           0          1
                              xt                                                 xt


                          (a)                                                (b)


                   Figure 22.12 The reconstructed Hénon map: (a) the actual attractor plotted from the
                   training points; (b) the attractor as approximated by an MLP


                   Hénon Map Our last example is a more complicated time series generated from
                   the Hénon map. (See Section 11.1 on page 160 for an introduction to the Hénon
                   map.) For this problem we must use two inputs that use two successive points from
                   the time series, (xt , xt+1 ), while the target output is the next point, xt+2 . Since
                   this time series is more complicated than any of the other examples, we will need
                   more hidden neurons to increase the approximation power of the MLP. I used ten
                   hidden neurons.
                       After 3000 training iterations the error drops considerably. The error could
                   be reduced further with more training, but I would like this example to illustrate
                   how an MLP could be slightly under-trained. Figure 22.12 shows the phase space
                   of the actual Hénon map and the reconstructed attractor from the MLP. The
                   approximation is very close, but some subtle diﬀerences are noticeable. The map
                   in time series form is shown in Figure 22.13, which again reveals that the fit is very
                   close but not perfect. Finally, Figure 22.14 shows the training error for the entire
                   3000 iterations.

                       All of these examples demonstrate that MLPs can learn mappings by just looking
                   at training examples. What is not clear, however, is how the MLPs can form the
                   correct output response. Multilayer perceptrons have a property known as universal
                   approximation, which means that given any functional mapping, there exists an
                   MLP that can approximate the mapping to an arbitrary accuracy. This does not
                   necessarily mean that we can always find the weights to build that particular MLP;
                   it just means that some values for the weights exist. MLPs with a single hidden
                   layer of sigmoidal neurons are universal, but the proof of universality for this class
402                       Neural Networks and Learning




                  2

                  1

  xt              0

              -1


                      0     10         20      30       40       50        60       70      80       90       100
                                                                  t


                          Figure 22.13 An actual and predicted portion of the Hénon map in time-series form:
                          The lines are for the actual series and the points are the predicted values




              2




  RMS Error
              1




                  0              500            1000            1500            2000          2500           3000
                                                         Training Iterations


                          Figure 22.14      Training error for the Hénon map as a function of the number of training
                          iterations
403   Neural Networks and Learning




(a)                       +                                   =




(b)                       +                                   =




(c)                       ◦                                   =




      Figure 22.15 Forming bumps with 4 + 1 neurons: (a) two parallel but opposite sigmoids
      add up to form a single ridge; (b) two ridges form an elevated cross pattern with a peaked
      center; (c) the cross pattern is composed through a fifth sigmoid that filters out all but
      the peak, leaving a single local bump
404          Neural Networks and Learning



             of networks is not simple. With two hidden layers and a linear output, there is an
             elegant geometric proof for showing that MLPs are universal. The basic idea was
             first shown by Alan Lapedes and Rob Farber, and works as follows.
                 Suppose you have a continuous function that you want to approximate. The
             function may take any number of inputs. All we need is that the output of the
             function be well-defined for any legal input. The key idea is that a function of
             this type can always be approximated by adding up a large collection of localized
             bumps. If one legal input-output pair for this function is (x, y), then you will want
             to place a local bump at position x with a height of y. For other point pairs, you
             will place more bumps. You only need to make sure that the bumps are thin enough
             that they do not interfere with each other too severely, and wide enough that they
             allow for smooth interpolation between the bumps.
                 Universality is guaranteed if we can show that an MLP can place a bump with
             an arbitrary width and height at an arbitrary location. Figure 22.15 shows how
             a single bump can be formed with five hidden neurons in a two-dimensional input
             space. In the first stage, a single ridge is formed by adding up two sigmoids that
             are reflections of one another. Two more sigmoids are used to form a second ridge
             that is perpendicular to the first. Adding up the ridges yields a cross pattern that
             is elevated in the middle. The cross pattern was formed from four hidden neurons
             in the first hidden layer. The highest point in the cross pattern has a height of
             4, the lowest points are near 0, and the ridges have a height of 2. The last step
             needed to form the bump is to pass the cross pattern through yet another hidden
             neuron in the second hidden layer of neurons. This final neuron acts as a filter. The
             weights coming into it squelch anything below 3.5, and amplify anything above 3.5.
             This has the aﬀect of removing everything but the peak in the middle of the cross
             pattern, thus forming a bump.
                 By adjusting the weights, we can place this bump in any location and give it
             any height or width that we wish. For the general case of having n inputs, we need
             2n + 1 nodes to form a bump in an n-dimensional space. And by adding up many
             such bumps, it is possible to represent any conceivable input-output mapping with
             a multilayer perceptron.


22.6 Internal Representations
             Since we have seen that MLPs can represent arbitrary functions, we will now con-
             sider a final example that shows how backpropagation can be used by an MLP to
             form an internal representation of a set of input patterns. This is a very subtle
             and important point, for if we are to expect a neural network to do something that
             seems intelligent, then it is necessary that a neural network can learn and exploit
             patterns within a set of data.
                For example, suppose that we wish for a neural net to perform some task, be it
             function approximation, pattern classification, or some other generic type of prob-
405   Neural Networks and Learning



                          Input Patterns                    Target Patterns
               R     S      S   S    S   F      F     R    S S S S F                F
               0     1      0   0    0   1      0     0    1   0   0 0     1        0
               0     0      1   0    0   1      0     0    0   1   0 0     1        0
               0     0      0   1    0   1      0     0    0   0   1 0     1        0
               0     0      0   0    1   1      0     0    0   0   0 1     1        0
               0     1      0   0    0   1      0     1    1   0   0 0     1        0
               0     0      1   0    0   1      0     1    0   1   0 0     1        0
               0     0      0   1    0   1      0     1    0   0   1 0     1        0
               0     0      0   0    1   1      0     1    0   0   0 1     1        0
               1     1      0   0    0   1      0     0    1   0   0 0     1        0
               1     0      1   0    0   1      0     0    0   1   0 0     1        0
               1     0      0   1    0   1      0     0    0   0   1 0     1        0
               1     0      0   0    1   1      0     0    0   0   0 1     1        0
               1     1      0   0    0   1      0     1    1   0   0 0     1        0
               1     0      1   0    0   1      0     1    0   1   0 0     1        0
               1     0      0   1    0   1      0     1    0   0   1 0     1        0
               1     0      0   0    1   1      0     1    0   0   0 1     1        0
               x1    x2     x3 x4 x5 x6         x7    t1   t2 t3 t4 t5 t6           t7


      Table 22.1 Random, structured, and fixed data mixed into one data set: Columns
      labeled R, S, and F are eﬀectively random, structured, and fixed, respectively


      lem. Furthermore, let’s also assume that the input data to the neural network
      contain things that are random, perfectly regular, and structured in some way. Our
      hope will be that the neural network will learn to ignore the randomness and regu-
      larity, but also discover the hidden order in the structured input data and be able
      to internally represent it in a more meaningful manner.
          Put another way, the neural network and learning algorithm’s task is a lot like
      what many people have to go through in order to pick a movie that they will like
      with high probability, based only on what a fixed set of movie reviewers say about
      the movie. Some reviewers seem to like everything ever put on film, so what they
      say about any movie is useless, in that it tells you nothing at all about whether or
      not you will like a movie. Other movie reviewers have such complex tastes that you
      may be hard pressed to ever guess what kind of movie they would like or dislike.
      However, if you find that your taste in science fiction films is similar to one particular
      critic’s, or that your preferences for comedy films are exactly opposite to those of
      another critic, then these are both useful pieces of information for you to use when
      picking a movie.
          To illustrate these issues further, Table 22.1 shows sixteen input and target
      patterns that we would like a neural network to reproduce (meaning that given
406               Neural Networks and Learning



         Random bit




      Structured bits




            Always 1

            Always 0

                                     Encoder                                Decoder


                  Figure 22.16 An encoder-decoder MLP that compresses a seven-bit input pattern into
                  two bits, then decodes it with minimal information loss


                  an input vector from one row, we would like the neural network to reproduce the
                  corresponding target vector from the same row). For the moment, we will ignore
                  the neural network and just concentrate on the data in the table. The most obvious
                  thing about the data is that inputs x6 and x7 , along with targets t6 and t7 , are
                  perfectly regular in that they never change. This means not only that t6 and t7 are
                  perfectly predictable, but also that x6 and x7 contain no information that would
                  allow us to infer other things about other portions of the input or target vectors.
                      Note, however, that this is not the case for inputs x2 through x5 and targets t2
                  through t5 . As with the fixed portions of the data set, the structured inputs are
                  equal to their corresponding targets, but within the subset of these four inputs (or
                  targets) there is a pattern, in that exactly one of the four inputs (or targets) is
                  always on. Thus, if you know only which of the four inputs is on, you also know
                  the value of the remaining three inputs as well as of the four targets.
                      Things are quite diﬀerent for x1 and t1 which are labeled as “eﬀectively random.”
                  For these two values there is no pattern to their values, since every combination of
                  values is contained in the data set. For example, if you were to make any hypothesis
                  concerning when or why x1 or t1 is 1 or 0 (as a function of the other inputs or
                  targets), your hypothesis would have to be wrong, because whatever rule you try
                  to construct could be disproved by a counter-example from another portion of the
                  data set.
                      Putting this all together, we would like a neural network to discover the hidden
                  order in the structured data but learn to ignore the fixed and random portions.
407   Neural Networks and Learning



      Moreover, our neural network will never “see” all of the data set at once, but only
      individual rows in isolation.
          Figure 22.16 shows a special type of neural network that will be used for this
      problem. The network has seven inputs and targets that correspond to the dimen-
      sionalities of the data set. But also notice that there are only two hidden neurons.
      These two hidden neurons form an information bottleneck in that the network must
      learn to compress the information from the inputs into two values that can be de-
      compressed by the right half of the network. The left portion of the network is an
      encoder because it encodes the seven inputs into two values, while the right half
      acts as a decoder that attempts to invert the encoding performed earlier.
          While you and I have had the benefit of looking at the data set in its entirety
      beforehand, we also know that there is a structured pattern in four of the inputs and
      the targets. Since the neural network is randomly initialized, it has no preconceived
      notion about anything concerning the training data. It does not know what is
      regular, irregular, compressible, or incompressible. It has only one goal, and that is
      to reproduce the target values with the highest amount of accuracy. But to do this,
      it must learn to ignore the randomness and regularity because it is constrained to
      pass all of the information through only two hidden neurons. Thus, while we have
      explicitly constructed the network to minimize the redundancy of the input vectors,
      it must learn to do so almost as an implicit goal.
          Training the network from Figure 22.16 on the data from Table 22.1 proceeds
      fairly rapidly for this problem. After only a few thousand training cycles it produces
      the output shown in Table 22.2 to within 10 percent. As can be seen, the structured
      and fixed target values are accurately reproduced while the random data are only
      statistically described by their mean. Things get interesting when we consider the
      hidden activation values that are produced for particular input values. What we
      find is that the network produces four distinct pairs of activation values that depend
      only on the structured data; thus, the network has learned to ignore both the fixed
      and the random data under all circumstances. The four distinct activation pairs
      for the hidden neurons represent the four types of input patterns for the structured
      data. The decoder portion of the network has learned to recover the structured data
      from the compressed versions in the hidden nodes, while the outputs corresponding
      to the fixed and random data are hardcoded in that they are produced independent
      of the hidden nodes. It is also interesting that the network settles on the mean of
      the data for both the random and the fixed data. For the fixed data this happens to
      be a perfect representation, but for the random data the mean is a slightly imperfect
      representation.
          We should also note that the particular method of encoding and decoding the
      input vectors is somewhat arbitrary. For example, instead of the four activation
      pairs being (0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1), and (0, 0), they could have just as easily been (1,
      1), (0, 1), (0, 0), and (1, 0). The specifics of the encoding are not important. What
      is important is that the encoder and decoder agree on the representation.
408   Neural Networks and Learning



                   Input Patterns             Hidden            Output Patterns
        R     S      S   S    S   F      F     Units      R     S S S S F                F
        0     1      0   0    0   1      0    0    1      0.5   1  0   0   0 1           0
        0     0      1   0    0   1      0    1    0      0.5   0  1   0   0 1           0
        0     0      0   1    0   1      0    1    1      0.5   0  0   1   0 1           0
        0     0      0   0    1   1      0    0    0      0.5   0  0   0   1 1           0
        0     1      0   0    0   1      0    0    1      0.5   1  0   0   0 1           0
        0     0      1   0    0   1      0    1    0      0.5   0  1   0   0 1           0
        0     0      0   1    0   1      0    1    1      0.5   0  0   1   0 1           0
        0     0      0   0    1   1      0    0    0      0.5   0  0   0   1 1           0
        1     1      0   0    0   1      0    0    1      0.5   1  0   0   0 1           0
        1     0      1   0    0   1      0    1    0      0.5   0  1   0   0 1           0
        1     0      0   1    0   1      0    1    1      0.5   0  0   1   0 1           0
        1     0      0   0    1   1      0    0    0      0.5   0  0   0   1 1           0
        1     1      0   0    0   1      0    0    1      0.5   1  0   0   0 1           0
        1     0      1   0    0   1      0    1    0      0.5   0  1   0   0 1           0
        1     0      0   1    0   1      0    1    1      0.5   0  0   1   0 1           0
        1     0      0   0    1   1      0    0    0      0.5   0  0   0   1 1           0
        x1    x2     x3 x4 x5 x6         x7   z1  z2      t1    t2 t3 t4 t5 t6           t7


      Table 22.2 Results of training an encoder-decoder neural network: the network com-
      presses the structured data, statistically describes the random data, and hard-codes the
      regular data. The shown values are only approximate


         The key point to all of this is that the neural network learned to form an internal
      representation of the input patterns that ignored regularity and randomness, and
      compressed whatever could be compressed. It is never guaranteed that a neural
      network can do the same thing for any data set, but it is pleasing, nonetheless, that
      our network does the right thing for this example.
         Forming internal representations is arguably one of the most important char-
      acteristics of any type of model. If we wish to train a neural network to perform
      pattern classification or to model a physical process, an internal representation for
      the data is useful in that it can often represent that which is truly important about
      the data. For the case of pattern classification, some patterns may be invisible
      to humans because they are visible only in some higher-dimensional space or they
      may exist only with respect to millions of individual data points. Having a model
      and a learning method that can automatically discover such hidden order is crucial
      to the goal of more compactly describing the phenomenon. Similarly, for the case
      of modeling a physical process, sometimes the most predictive part of state space
      does not reside in any individual input, but is instead some function of multiple in-
      puts. Discovering the hidden function is, again, another facet of forming an internal
      representation.
409          Neural Networks and Learning



22.7 Other Applications
             The four example problems from the previous sections only scratch the surface of
             what it is possible to do with neural networks. Moreover, the multilayer perceptron
             is only one of many diﬀerent types of neural networks in current use; it just happens
             to be the most popular type. In this section I will briefly list some applications in
             the hope of conveying the broad applicability of neural networks.

             Pattern Recognition The general problem of pattern recognition can be applied
             to a nearly infinite number of problem areas. Some current applications include
             optical character recognition for human handwriting, facial recognition, sonar clas-
             sification, credit card fraud detection, and electrocardiogram classification. In this
             application area the inputs to a neural network can consist of any digital form of
             information, such as an image, sound, spending record, or heartbeat.

             Function Approximation Included here are all forms of time-series prediction,
             which include predicting the stock market and the weather. There are also many
             industrial processes that are not well understood analytically. Neural networks have
             been used to build data-based models that surpass in accuracy models built from
             physical first principles. Because a neural network has a well-defined structure, it
             is possible and often helpful to perform sensitivity analysis on a neural network
             trained to emulate a physical process. Doing so allows researchers to find out what
             measurements in a process have predictive power, which gives engineers greater
             insight into how a physical process works.

             Signal Processing Many audio signals are continuously corrupted with noise.
             In a hearing aid, for example, background conversations, miscellaneous white noise,
             and spurious events like a loud bang can cause trouble for people who are wearing a
             device that amplifies these sounds as well as normal conversations. Neural networks
             are being used to selectively filter out diﬀerent types of noise, thus enabling hearing
             aid users to perceive their environment more accurately. Similar applications can
             be found in cellular telephones and speaker phones.

             Control Building models of processes can be diﬃcult, but an even more challeng-
             ing problem is controlling a process. Using techniques from reinforcement learning,
             neural networks have been trained to control many diﬀerent systems. Current ap-
             plications include neural networks that can drive a car down a highway, control
             chemical processes, or manipulate a robot arm. There are many diﬀerent ways to
             build controllers with neural networks. One way is to model an ideal controller al-
             ready in existence. The neural network controller essentially learns to duplicate the
             actions taken by another controller (say, a human). In other situations a technique
             known as model inversion can be used. Model-based control is a third technique
410         Neural Networks and Learning



            that trains a controller to manipulate a second neural network that models some
            process. This last technique has been used to build controllers for processes that
            humans are incapable of controlling.

            Compression and Correction Many data streams coming from sensors contain
            redundancy that can be exploited. In some cases it is possible to exploit this
            property by building an auto-associative neural network (similar to the encoder-
            decoder from the previous section) that merely produces an output vector that is
            equivalent to an input vector. The usefulness in this is that a hidden layer can be
            made to have fewer neurons than there are inputs or outputs. This means that
            the neural network must learn an eﬃcient way to compress the data through the
            bottleneck of the hidden layer. In so doing, a neural network not only may compress
            the information into a more usable form, but also can correct for missing values in
            the input vector.

            Soft Sensors From an engineering point of view, it is seldom possible to put as
            many sensors on a system as we would like. Consider detecting illegal emissions
            from an automobile engine. Installing complicated sensors on every car would con-
            tribute greatly to production costs. Researchers are working on building neural
            networks that can infer a diﬃcult but needed measurement from readily available
            measurements. A neural network for this application would have things like engine
            temperature, gas consumption, and engine misfires as inputs and would output an
            approximation of the desired measurement, toxic emissions.

            Anomaly Detection In this application area, a neural network is used to build
            a model of “typical” states of some system. Despite the fact that the network sees
            only the normal states, it is possible for a network to recognize anomalous conditions
            simply because they diﬀer from the normal state. Automatically recognizing when
            anomalies occur can prevent component failures before they are too serious (say, in
            a helicopter), or even distinguish abnormal heartbeats from normal ones.

                Because neural networks is such an active area of research, it is quite possible
            for this list to be out of date by the time this book is published. Nevertheless, as
            computing power increases and more data become available, it is likely that neural
            networks will be applied to hundreds of diﬀerent applications.


22.8 Unifying Themes
            Part of the opening discussion was unfair in its characterization of a single neuron.
            Much has been learned over the past thirty years about how neurons work, but there
            are still many puzzles to be solved. Sophisticated models of a single neuron that
            go way beyond the ideas in a perceptron neuron may contain hundreds of coupled
411          Neural Networks and Learning



             nonlinear diﬀerential equations that can be only coarsely simulated in real time on
             a computer. While the research community is somewhat split as to how complete
             our understanding of a single neuron can ever be, the possibility remains that we
             may never have a perfect understanding of how a neuron works. But this does not
             stop us from using the things that we already know about how real neurons work.
             In fact, some have suggested that perfect knowledge of how biological neurons work
             is not strictly necessary for us to exploit them in simulations. This seems to be a
             reasonable hypothesis when we consider that computer scientists can safely ignore
             the quantum-level events that occur in real digital circuitry without losing any of
             the important details of how computation works in principle.
                 One of the more important parts of an artificial neuron is the nonlinear activation
             function. We were able to build more powerful neural networks by having inter-
             mediate hidden neurons produce values that were used by neurons further down
             the network. If a linear activation function were used, the resulting output of a
             multilayer perceptron would be yet another linear function of the inputs. In other
             words, an MLP with all linear activation functions can produce only the same class
             of functions that a single-layer linear perceptron can. This means that there would
             be no advantage in having multiple layers in a network. Thus, nonlinearity in a
             neuron is a a critical part of its power.
                 Also note that most researchers do not believe that the brain performs anything
             like backpropagation at the level of a neuron. A natural learning phenomenon that
             most closely resembles backprop is probably related to simple behavioral adaptation,
             which is a feedback process that adjusts behaviors to account for an environment.
                 We also know that human intelligence emerges from multiple levels of complexity.
             On the topmost level, intelligence may consist of many interacting yet partially
             modular components such as memory, feature recognition, and language processing,
             to name a few. On the lowest level lies the behavior of a single neuron. In between
             these two extremes lies the massive interconnectedness that glues the lower-level
             functions to higher-level functions. Intelligence may be an emergent phenomenon
             that can be best appreciated from a higher-level viewpoint, while neural interactions
             occupy the lower rung of the ladder. Because of this, researchers in learning must
             often attempt to straddle reductionist and holistic viewpoints simultaneously.


22.9 Further Exploration
             A single program, mlp, was used for the four experiments in this chapter. The
             command-line options are summarized in Table 22.3. The program simulates an
             MLP with a single hidden layer of neurons. The number of neurons in the MLP
             is determined by the values used with the -numin, -numhid, and -numout options.
             The training data file is specified with the -dfile option. Data files should begin
             with a single number to indicate the number of training patterns, which is then
             followed by all of the patterns given as (input, target) vector pairs.
412   Neural Networks and Learning



            Option Name        Option Type       Option Meaning
            -dfile             string            data file name
            -numin             integer           number of inputs
            -numhid            integer           number of hidden nodes
            -numout            integer           number of outputs
            -lrate             double            learning rate
            -mrate             double            momentum rate
            -winit             double            weight initialization factor
            -linout            switch            use linear outputs?
            -steps             integer           number of simulated steps
            -seed              integer           random seed for initial state
            -pdump             switch            dump patterns at end of run?
            -gdump             switch            dump gnuplot commands at end?
            -freq              integer           status printout frequency


                           Table 22.3    Command-line options for mlp


          The -winit option specifies how big the initial weights will be. If w is the value
      passed to this option, then all weights will be randomly initialized in the −w to
      w range with a uniform distribution. The -seed option is helpful if you wish to
      rerun an experiment with a diﬀerent set of initial weights. If real-valued outputs
      are needed (as with the logistic map), the -linout switch should be set. The
      program trains the MLP for the number of iterations specified by -steps. With
      the -freq option, the printout frequency of the training can be controlled. Each of
      these printouts consists of the average error of the MLP computed over the entire
      training set.
          With the -pdump option set, the program will print each input along with the
      MLP’s output at the end of training. And with the -gdump option set, the program
      will create a file called mlp.gnp that contains specifications for the trained network
      represented as a gnuplot function. This is convenient if you want to plot the surface
      that represents the MLP’s response to two inputs.
          Finally, the learning rate or step size is controlled by the -lrate option. There
      is also an option called -mrate that controls a momentum factor that is used in
      the training. We did not talk about momentum prior to this section, but it is a
      simple modification to backprop that greatly increases performance. To explain
      how it works, for weight vector w with momentum rate µ, let the weight change
      determined by plain backprop be denoted by ∆wbp . The update rule used by
      backprop with momentum is

                             ∆wnew       = µ∆wold + η∆wbp and
                                   new
                               w         = wold + ∆wnew ,
413         Neural Networks and Learning



            with µ taking a value between 0 and 1. This allows the program to retain a little
            bit of the previous step direction. If the MLP proceeds down an error surface like a
            ball rolling down a hill, momentum allows the ball to speed up over long downhill
            stretches as well as to jump over little potholes.
                Those wishing to try their hand on more sophisticated neural architectures and
            learning algorithms should consult one of the texts listed in the next section or the
            bibliography.


22.10 Further Reading
             Caudill, M. & Butler, C. (1990). Naturally intelligent systems. Cambridge, Mass.:
             MIT Press.
             Haykin, S. (1994). Neural networks: A comprehensive foundation. New York:
             MacMillan.
             Hertz, J., Krogh, A., & Palmer, R. G. (1991). Introduction to the theory of neural
             computation. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
             Minsky, M. & Papert, S. (1988). Perceptrons (expanded ed.). Cambridge, Mass.:
             MIT Press.
             Nilsson, N. J. (1965). Learning machines: Foundations of trainable pattern classi-
             fying systems. New York: McGraw-Hill.
             Press, W. H., Flannery, B. P., Teukolsky, S. A., & Vetterling, W. T. (1986).
             Numerical recipes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
             Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1986). Parallel distributive
             processing. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
23   Postscript: Adaptation




        The sciences do not try to explain, they hardly even try to interpret, they mainly make
            models. By a model is meant a mathematical construct which, with the addition of
      certain verbal interpretations, describes observed phenomena. The justification of such a
                       mathematical construct is solely and precisely that it is expected to work.
                                                                          — John von Neumann


                                                  Breadth-first search is the bulldozer of science.
                                                                                — Randy Goebel


      The most extensive computation known has been conducted over the last billion years on
     a planet-wide scale: it is the evolution of life. The power of this computation is illustrated
                  by the complexity and beauty of its crowning achievement, the human brain.
                                                                                — David Rogers




     In this final postscript we will dissect the general form of an adaptive system into
     three subsystems that are all deserving of study in their own right: an environment,
     a model of the environment, and a search procedure that attempts to adapt the
     model to the environment. We will see that all three components of an adaptive
     system are highly dependent on each other, in that each partially determines the
     other two. Our goal for this postscript is to see how this interdependence can
     be viewed from a computational viewpoint. As a consequence, all sophisticated
     adaptive procedures, including scientific methodology, are subject to the paradoxical
     attributes associated with self-reference and computability.
        We will first compare and contrast learning, evolution, and cultural adaptation
     to examine the relationship between models and search methods, and also to see
     how all three processes are similar in their generality. We will then look at how
     an environment limits the types of feasible search procedures. This means that
     search methods can be adapted to tune models more eﬀectively. This is followed
     by an examination of the relationship between models and environments that will
416         Postscript: Adaptation



            highlight coadaptive processes that tune models and environments in a recursive
            manner. Putting all of these facts together, we will then consider how adaptation
            can be a “bootstrap” process by which adaptive systems spawn increasingly more
            sophisticated adaptive systems.
               In the final section of this chapter, we will consider how the recursive framework
            of adaptive systems relates to Gödel’s incompleteness and Chaitin’s generalization
            of Turing’s Halting Problem. In the end, we will find that these two computational
            results bring forth severe limitations on how well we can know and understand the
            universe.


23.1 Models and Search Methods
            The term model can mean diﬀerent things in diﬀerent contexts, but for our purposes
            we will use a definition that is somewhat connected to the topics from this book
            part. With this in mind, we will use the term to mean a well-defined process that
            maps inputs to outputs but also happens to be parameterized in such a way that the
            model can be tuned by changing the parameters. The parameters may be discrete
            or continuous, but in either case they act as knobs that can be adjusted to change
            the input-output mapping that the model produces. As a simple example, we could
            model a periodic process by the equation

                                             f (x; a, b, c) = a sin(bx − c),

            which has an output, a single input, x, and three parameters, a, b and c, that corre-
            spond to the amplitude, frequency, and phase of the sine wave, respectively. With
            this equation, we could adjust the three parameters to build a rough approximation
            of a frictionless pendulum, the average seasonal temperature, or the lunar cycle.
                A search procedure is a method for choosing parameter values so that a model
            is made to closely approximate an environment. For the sine wave example, the
            model is so simple that for any environment, there is a best solution that can be
            found with a deterministic procedure. In this case, the simplicity of the model has
            simplified the search procedure for the parameters.
                For most real-world systems that one could imagine modeling, a simple sine wave
            is completely inadequate as a representation of the environment. On the other hand,
            in principle classifier systems and neural networks can be used to model anything,
            because they are so general that virtually any process can be approximated with
            them.1 But approximation power is somewhat of a curse as well. By using a
            more complicated model, we lose the bonus of having a search procedure that is
            guaranteed to work under all circumstances. Things are so bad that the general
               1 Including GAs in this statement is a little problematic, since GAs are really a type of search

            procedure, as we shall see shortly.
417   Postscript: Adaptation



      problem of optimizing a neural network or a classifier system is known to be NP-
      complete under many reasonable cases and intractable under some special cases.
          This double-sided result is partially due to the modular nature of the models.
      Both classifier systems and neural networks derive their power from the fact that
      they are composed of many simple units that can be combined to form complex
      patterns. Doyne Farmer and others have made a more profound observation by
      noting that the similarities of these adaptive systems actually run quite deep. The
      following discussion is mostly inspired by Farmer’s “Rosetta Stone” paper, which
      compares the aforementioned adaptive systems with immune and autocatalytic net-
      works. Here, I will just give a summary of the comparison for neural networks and
      classifier systems, but afterward I will attempt to expand on the comparison to
      bridge the idea for evolution, culture, and learning.
          Since the output of both a neural network and a classifier system is a composition
      of values computed at intermediate stages, both models need a form of working
      memory that allows these auxiliary values to be stored. For a neural network, this
      is simply a neuron that holds some value that is later passed to another neuron.
      The equivalent structure for a classifier system is a little more subtle because we
      haven’t been in the habit of drawing classifier systems as networks. However, a
      message in a classifier system serves the same purposes despite the fact that it does
      not directly correspond to a tangible structure like a neuron. Messages are posted
      by classifiers on the message list, where they remain for a single time step. At the
      beginning of the next time step, the active messages trigger other classifiers; thus,
      the messages serve the role of holding an intermediate piece of information and
      triggering the production of other information.
          Synapses in a neural network serve the role of transporting information from a
      source to a destination. They may also be associated with a strength. Classifiers
      serve a similar role since they are paired with a condition and a message, which
      act as a source and a destination, respectively. A synapse’s strength is analogous
      to a classifier’s strength; both strengths increase the probability that a message or
      signal will have a consequence when propagated further.
          The net input of a neuron is computed as a weighted sum of other neuron
      activation values. In a classifier system, identical messages may be posted by more
      than one classifier. This is identical to having multiple neurons propagating signals
      to a single destination. Where a neural network uses a weighted sum to combine
      the signals, a classifier system will usually combine all of the identical messages into
      a single message that has an intensity proportional to the sum of the strengths of
      the original messages. Thus, both systems combine multiple signals into one in a
      weighted manner.
          A neural network will additionally pass the net input of a neuron through a
      sigmoidal activation function, which has the eﬀect of limiting the activation value
      to a well-defined range. Likewise, classifier systems do not propagate all messages
418   Postscript: Adaptation



      on the message list at each iteration. Instead, only the strongest messages are able
      to trigger classifiers on the next time step. This selection method eﬀectively treats
      a group of the strongest messages as active and thresholds all others to an inactive
      state. Hence, both systems pass information through thresholds that allow only a
      portion of the information to propagate.
          One could continue this comparison to the point of showing that it is always
      possible to have these two model types mutually emulate one another in an eﬃcient
      manner. However, the model types diﬀer most in how they are tuned to their envi-
      ronment. For neural networks, a learning-like procedure is used to slightly change
      weights according to a error gradient measure, that is, if an error measure decreases
      in some direction of the weight space, then a small step is taken in that direction.
      Classifier systems use a related method for adjusting weights (the bucket brigade al-
      gorithm, or implicit bucket brigade) that assigns credit from one classifier to another
      in the form of payments. But also note that classifier systems additionally depend
      on a genetic algorithm to introduce new classifiers into the system. Thus, classifier
      systems are adapted with a learning-like procedure as well as an evolutionary-like
      procedure.
          In the real world, cultural breakthroughs are made on time scales that are slow
      relative to learning but fast relative to evolution. In the simplest case, cultural
      adaptation is merely a process of imitation, as is the case with many animals. For
      humans, cultural adaptation has become far more significant because of the inven-
      tion of language. For culture, language serves much the same role that far-reaching
      synapses do in a brain. Whenever an innovation can be passed only via imitation,
      propagation of the innovation can occur only at a very slow and localized rate.
      However, language, in particular writing, enables innovations to spread both far
      and wide. Whereas neurons serve the role of information holders in a neural net-
      work, humans act as the basic information repository in a cultural system. Under
      this view, synaptic strength starts to resemble the number and total influence of the
      holders of a particular idea. Individuals modify ideas with learning by incremen-
      tally improving on an idea that was acquired elsewhere. For example, Catholicism
      is an idea that has been around for quite a while. It is typically passed from parent
      to child, but on occasion it is transferred in a more evangelical manner. Influential
      members of the faith have incrementally modified the religion through their own
      eﬀorts, as in the case of Thomas Aquinas, whose philosophical writings changed the
      way many Catholics interpreted the Bible. In other cases, the changes in Catholi-
      cism have resembled evolution more closely, as when the church accommodated new
      members by incorporating (memetic crossover?) pagan festivals as oﬃcial holidays.
          On a global scale, biological evolution starts to resemble culture and learning
      if we consider the species to be the basic type of information holder. Species are
      connected to each other through a web of interactions that may be competitive or
      cooperative. The population or total amount of genetic material resembles what
419         Postscript: Adaptation



            we have been thinking of as the unit strength in the other models. Evolution
            performs a type of parameter search that stochastically samples nearby points in
            the genome. Genetic shifts that result in a more fit individual can move the entire
            species in a specific genetic direction. While this is not the same as a gradient-
            based search, stochastic sampling and gradient ascent are both examples of the
            hill-climbing search method.
                All of this will be relevant in the next section, where we will see how search
            methods relate to environments and search spaces.


23.2 Search Methods and Environments
            Since adaptive systems have parameters that can be modified, the space of all
            possible parameter settings defines a search space. For evolutionary systems, the
            search space consists of all conceivable DNA sequences, while for a neural network
            with n weights, the search space is equal to an n-dimensional hyperspace of weight
            settings. The purpose of adaptation is to move through the space from a region
            of poor fitness to one of good fitness. However, since fitness is a measure of how
            successfully a model is matched to its environment, the diﬃculty of the search
            problem is intimately tied to the environment. In this section, we will see that
            search methods may be adapted to an environment. In other words, we will see
            that phrases such as “learning to learn” or “evolving evolution” may refer to real
            processes.
                To explain what is meant by a “search method,” imagine that you have a very
            important meeting that is going to start promptly at midnight on the highest point
            of a mountain range. There is no way of getting to this point except to climb, and
            to make things worse, you do not have a map of the region nor do you have any
            idea where the peak is located. You have a flashlight to light your way, but there
            is a dense fog surrounding the mountain that permits you to see only about one
            foot in front of you. You have only three things working in your favor. First, this
            mountain range happens to be on a small planet with very low gravity, so you can
            make large leaps if you are certain that there is firm ground where you will land.
            Second, there are lots of little pebbles lying about, and being the current world
            champion in darts, you can throw the pebbles with perfect accuracy. Third, you
            have an altimeter and a compass to help you navigate.
                You start at the base of the mountain. Since you can see only very small local-
            ized regions, your first move is to try to walk uphill. This works for a while, but
            eventually you reach a small peak. Your companions are not there, so you know
            that this is not the tallest peak. Scooping up a handful of pebbles, you methodi-
            cally throw several pebbles in various directions, in an attempt to find a region that
            has a higher peak. At some point, one of your pebbles makes a sound that clearly
            indicates it has hit a peak that is higher than your current location. You then take
420   Postscript: Adaptation




      (a)                              (b)                               (c)


      Figure 23.1 Three types of search spaces: (a) smooth, (b) neither smooth nor strictly
      random, and (c) random


      advantage of the low gravity and leap to this new location. Once there, you start
      to climb in an uphill direction. This continues for some time, but you are running
      short of time. Fortunately, just before midnight, your friends hear your silly eﬀorts,
      throw you a rope, and pull you up to your destination.
          This little scenario illustrates how adaptation and search procedures must often
      proceed in a nearly blind manner, making tentative probes until progress is made.
      But there are other useful comparisons that can be made between search methods
      and this scenario. First, search methods can work in diﬀerent ways. Sometimes a
      localized search makes sense. Other times, you are better oﬀ probing more distant
      areas with pebbles. Learning in artificial neural networks takes smooth steps, while
      genetic algorithms perform a very structured type of probing.
          Figure 23.1 illustrates three types of search spaces. In Figure 23.1a we have a
      nice and smooth surface that lends itself to a learning-like procedure that makes
      small steps in an uphill direction. Some minor probing with the pebbles is necessary
      in order to find the largest peak, but one would expect to take more small steps than
      large probes for this search space. On the other hand, Figure 23.1c shows a surface
      that is completely random. Small and local steps are useless in a space such as this.
      The best search strategy for this surface is to randomly probe the entire region.
      Figure 23.1b shows a surface that is somewhat between the two extremes. While
      the surface has many irregular bumps, it contains a certain amount of continuity
      in that the height of a region is usually close to the height of nearby points. In a
      search environment such as this, you would need a mixture of local search steps and
      distant but structured probes to find the peak.
          Knowing the type of search space that you may encounter is a huge advantage
      if you are limited to a fixed search method. But what should you do if the search
      space changes? There is much evidence that search methods in natural systems
      are adapted according to environments. As a first example, consider the diﬀerent
421   Postscript: Adaptation



      types of search probes that a fit population would make versus those of an unfit
      population. In biological systems “search probe” can be thought of as a mutation
      rate, with large and small mutations corresponding to large and small probes, re-
      spectively. Fit individuals have little to gain and much to lose from large mutations.
      Fit individuals are far better oﬀ taking small steps so as not to undo earlier progress.
      However, for an unfit population, small steps are usually useless. When your house
      is on fire, drinking some iced tea may make you momentarily feel better, but is
      clearly a case of the right idea applied in too small a proportion. Unfit individuals
      are better served by attempting large probes, for in times of trouble, big changes
      are needed. If the change makes things worse, well, things were bad already.
          Biological systems have some sophisticated cellular machinery devoted to cor-
      recting replication errors in DNA. The level of sophistication varies between single-
      cell and multicellular animals as well as between the species, but it is present to
      some degree in all organisms. When bacteria are dangerously close to starving, the
      error correction machinery is inhibited to the degree that more drastic mutations
      are permitted. The advantages for bacteria in this case are significant: If a new
      mutation permits a bacterium to metabolize a new food source, then starvation can
      be avoided (Wills, 1989). Other examples of how evolution is evolved include the
      invention of sex in single-cell animals and sexual selection in the higher animals.
          Human culture has experienced several major innovations that have altered the
      way in which information is passed through the generations. Many animals can
      communicate in ways such that information important to survival is passed from
      individual to individual. Birds declare territory and warn of predators with songs
      and chirps. Bees do a cute little jig that describes the location of a nectar cache.
      Otters teach their young how to smash open shells. But humans have taken commu-
      nication to the unique extreme that our languages can express an infinite number
      of ideas. This innovation opened the door to a method of symbolically passing on
      information in a way that is distinct from imitation.
          Another major milestone in human culture is the advancement of written lan-
      guage. The alphabet and the printing press have enabled us to make more or less
      permanent records of important knowledge. And of comparable importance was
      the invention of the scientific method. By defining a systematic way to ask and
      answer questions about nature, the scientific method has enabled humans to propel
      themselves to the point that human culture now far outweighs evolution in its aﬀect
      on the world as a whole.
          While evolution has produced increasingly complex animals, it has also adapted
      the process of adaptation. Hence, we have not only an advancement of physi-
      cal structures but also an advancement of the functional structures of adaptation.
      Evolution produces simple adaptation, which allows for learning, which permits
      imitation, which spawns culture, which brings forth language, which gives birth to
      science, by which evolution is rediscovered.
422         Postscript: Adaptation



23.3 Environments and Models

            We have been speaking of models and environments as if they were two very distinct
            things that one could separate with a line. In reality, one creature’s model is another
            creature’s environment, which is to say that biological systems must adapt to other
            adapting biological systems. When multiple creatures simultaneously adapt to each
            other, the fitness of an organism becomes a function of how other organisms are
            behaving. The usual idea of evolution proceeding up a fitness landscape is no longer
            true in this case, for if a species stays still, that is, does not genetically change,
            and other species change, then the fitness landscape of the static species is altered
            despite its determination to stay still. This means that organisms often will have to
            continuously adapt just to stay at a comparable level of fitness. This is why Stuart
            Kauﬀman has often referred to fitness landscapes as being squishy: Taking a step
            deforms the terrain.
                Coevolution encourages Red Queen scenarios that often result in biological arms
            races (as discussed in Chapter 20) that spawn adaptations that would never come
            about on their own. Danny Hillis and others have exploited coevolution as a means
            for improving the evolutionary optimization of genetic algorithms. But it is the
            mutual adaptation that changes both models and environments that is our main
            interest in this section.
                Coadaptation relates to the search problem in a very unusual way. To see
            why, consider the No Free Lunch (NFL) theorem of David Wolpert and William
            Macready. Because there are so many diﬀerent methods of performing search and
            optimization, one hot topic among researchers is the relative eﬃciency of the dif-
            ferent methods. If one method could be clearly identified as being better than
            the others, then computer scientists could use the best method on any problem
            and no longer worry about finding a better technique. The NFL theorem states
            that over all possible search spaces, all methods perform equally well, including the
            simple technique of randomly guessing. Wolpert and Macready proved the NFL
            theorem by averaging a search score over every possible search space, which will
            contain well-behaved surfaces like Figure 23.1a as well as many random surfaces
            like Figure 23.1c.
                At first glance the NFL theorem seems to be very disappointing in its impli-
            cations. Under a strict interpretation it means that gradient-based learning and
            genetic algorithms are no better than a random guess. But Wolpert and Macready
            (as well as Stuart Kauﬀman) have pointed out that it may actually imply something
            far more interesting. Specifically, we know that evolutionary fitness landscapes are
            far from random. Kauﬀman has suggested that the NFL theorem actually high-
            lights the importance of coadaptation. When an animal and its environment are
            mutually adapting to one another, the fitness landscapes (that is, the evolutionary
            search spaces) are molded to one another. Coadaptation squeezes the search spaces
423         Postscript: Adaptation



            in such a way that they become highly nonrandom. One implication of this is that
            search methods may be optimally adapted for the space that they are used in. In
            other words, evolution may be evolved.
                A similar property can be seen in learning systems as well. Training feedforward
            neural networks on a fixed set of input-output patterns is a relatively well-defined
            problem. Although finding the best weights for a feedforward network is known
            to be an NP-complete problem, there are many encouraging results that indicate
            that good solutions to challenging problems can be found. Parallel to the ideas
            in coevolution there are more complicated types of neural networks having recur-
            rent connections that couple the network’s output (or some internal states) to the
            network’s input. Networks of this type are far more powerful than strictly feed-
            forward nets (they are, in fact, capable of universal computation); however, the
            newly gained power comes at considerable expense. Specifically, finding the best
            set of weights for a recurrent network turns out to be an incomputable problem in
            the worst case, since the individual artificial neurons must adapt not only within
            the context of other neurons in the network but also in the context of the previous
            states of the neurons, making the whole problem hopelessly recursive. So, again, we
            find that once a system becomes self-referential, it must border a boundary between
            computability and incomputability. This means that no general technique can be
            used to solve the problem of training a recurrent neural network. Partial solutions
            must in some ways be adapted to the specifics of the problems. For systems of this
            type, “learning to learn” may be a more promising method.


23.4 Adaptation and Computation
            In speaking of adaptation as a process of model-building, we have really been talking
            about ideas very central not just to computer science but to all of science.
                In the end, scientific research is about building models. When we try to charac-
            terize a phenomenon by a set of equations or a program, it is a model that we are
            building. We interact with nature in many ways, but from a scientific perspective
            our interactions are characterized in two ways. First, we manipulate and observe
            nature so as to gather data. With this data we attempt to describe how nature
            works. For the second way, we use our descriptions of nature to make predictions of
            what nature will do at a later time. Our models are continuously adapted by new
            discoveries. And over time our models and our methods for adapting them become
            more sophisticated.
                Curiously, the theory of computation has a lot to say about the limits of what
            we can do with science. As discussed in Chapters 9 and 14, Gregory Chaitin’s
            extension of the Halting Problem proves that finding the smallest program (that
            is, a model) that explains a set of data (or observations) is in the general case
            undecidable. Considering that Occam’s Razor is one of the foundations of the way
424         Postscript: Adaptation



            we build our models, Chaitin’s result implies that there may be phenomena that
            cannot be described more compactly than themselves.
                From the opposite direction, Gödel’s incompleteness and Turing’s incomputabil-
            ity results (discussed in Chapters 4 and 3) tell us that even if we have a perfect
            model for some phenomenon, there are many interesting questions concerning the
            real phenomena that cannot be answered by looking at the model.
                Is this a gloomy view of how far science can go toward describing the universe?
            I don’t think so. To see why, read on.


23.5 Further Reading
             Casti, J. L. (1989). Alternate realities: Mathematical models of nature and man.
             New York: John Wiley & Sons.
             Farmer, J. D. (1990). Rosetta stone for connectionism. Physica D, 42(1–3): 153–
             187.
             Hillis, W. D. (1992). Co-evolving parasites improve simulated evolution as an op-
             timization procedure. In C. G. Langton, C. Taylor, J. D. Farmer, & S. Rasmussen
             (Eds.), Artificial life II, volume 10 of Sante Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of
             Complexity (pp. 313–324). Redwood City, Calif.: Addison-Wesley.
             Kauﬀman, S. (August 1991). Antichaos and adaptation. Sci. Am., 265(2): 64–70.
             Sarle, W. S. & Net Poohbahs (1994). Kangaroos and training neural networks.
             FAQ list available from ftp://ftp.sas.com/pub/neural/kangaroos.
             Wills, C. (1989). The wisdom of the genes. New York: Basic Books.
             Wolpert, D. H. & Macready, W. G. (1995). No free lunch theorems for search.
             Technical Report SFI-TR-95-02-010, The Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, N.M.
Epilogue


    Recursion, which is the hallmark of computation, is an integral part of the structural
    and functional self-similarity of fractals and chaos. Parallel collections of simple
    things possess a similar form of recursion that comes about from local interactions.
    When interactions are permitted to change, systems can display collective behavior
    that is computationally profound.
        The line between computability and incomputability defines a spectrum in which
    all natural phenomena exist. Things that reside at either of the two extremes are
    usually uninteresting because they are either too ordered or too disordered. Things
    in between the two operational extremes display a stunning variety of sophistication,
    complexity, and beauty that is directly related to the computable properties of these
    systems.
        Because of the power of computation and the ubiquity of computational-like
    features in natural systems, a mixture of computability and incomputability forms
    an interface between the hierarchical partitions of natural systems. This, in turn,
    has deep implications for how closely humanity can understand nature.
24   Duality and Dichotomy




                   When two texts, or two assertions, perhaps two ideas, are in contradiction,
            be ready to reconcile them rather than cancel one by the other; regard them as two
            diﬀerent facets, or two successive stages, of the same reality, a reality convincingly
                                                               human just because it is complex.
                                                                       — Marguerite Yourcenar


                                                            To see a World in a grain of Sand,
                                                               And a Heaven in a Wild Flower,
                                                         Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand,
                                                                        And Eternity in an hour.
                                                                               — William Blake




     I  n the various contexts of philosophy, religion, and science, humans have shown
     a fondness for classifying things in terms of absolutes, such as, black and white,
     good and evil, order and chaos, yin and yang, and so on. Absolutes are easy
     to comprehend and comfortable to our minds because they remove ambiguities
     and reinforce a sense of understanding. To be sure, there clearly exist domains
     in which binary rules not only work but also capture the essence of that which is
     being described. But for many things—and perhaps most things—reality blends
     the black-and-white absolutes into a beautiful melody of gray.
         Just as life depends on an environment that allows water to exist in solid, liquid,
     and gaseous forms, so nature’s most amazing and beautifully complex creations
     must exist at the juncture between computability and incomputability. On these
     two extremes scientific understanding is best pursued in the form of theory and
     experimentation, respectively. But at the interface between the two, both extreme
     approaches must give way to the grayness of reality.
         In this final chapter, we will pull together all of the loose threads from the earlier
     chapters and attempt to reconcile conflicting themes into a single message. We will
     first consider issues of Chapter 1 and reexamine some of the commonalities that can
     be found in the diverse topics that have been covered in this book. Afterward, we
428         Duality and Dichotomy
                                                                             Computation
                        self-reference                                                                                                           structural
                                                                     ion                                          Re                                     self-similarity
                                                                 tat                     Inco                       cu
                                                            ap                                                           rsi
                                                         ad                               mpu
                                                                                                                               on
                                                     Co
                                                                                            tabil
                                                                                                ity
                                                Hierarchical Models
                  Adaptation                                                                                                                                  Fractals
                                                                                                                                               els
                                                                                                                                          od
                                                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                                                    th
                                                                                                                               ow
                                                                                                                         Gr
                                       O                                                                                                               tors
                                 Self-                                                                                                               ttrac
                                                                 ta
                                    rgan                      toma                                                                               ge A
              environmental            izati              r Au
                                                                                                                                                                  functional
                                           on
                                                                                                                                               Stran
                    feedback                                                                    Em                                                             self-similarity
                                                      Cell                                        erg
                                                           ula                                          en
                                                                                                             ce
                                                                              Phase Transitions
                              Complex Systems                                                                                   Chaos
                                                                       multiplicity and parallelism
            Figure 24.1 The relationships among computation, fractals, chaos, complex systems,
            and adaptation
            will consider the boundary between computability and incomputability as it applies
            to the contents of this book and, in particular, the topics covered in the postscript
            chapters. We will then finish with a speculative discussion on how the grayness of
            this fundamental boundary is an integral part of the beauty of nature.
24.1 Web of Connections
            Continuing with some of the themes first introduced in Chapter 1, the properties
            of recursion, parallelism, and adaptation play an interesting role as attributes of
            natural systems. For example, in order for the universe to move coherently from
            one state to the next, the universe must “remember” previous states, which means
            that recursion (and its close cousins, feedback and iteration) exists as a form of
            memory that binds locally occurring moments in time. Multiplicity and parallelism
            play a similar role that has to do with binding locally occurring points in space.
429           Duality and Dichotomy



                  With this in mind, we can see how mixtures of recursion and multiplicity par-
              tially define and diﬀerentiate computation, fractals, chaos, complex systems, and
              adaptation. Figure 24.1, is a slightly revised version of Figure 1.1 that has a couple
              of extra labels to illustrate some of the relationships uncovered between the book
              parts. Starting from a computational framework, fractals are special “programs”
              that build self-similar structures. Chaotic systems are similar to fractals but also
              contain functional self-similarity that occurs at diﬀerent scales. By adding multi-
              plicity and parallelism to nonlinear systems, complex systems can be formed with
              only local interactions. And when complex systems are coupled to their environment
              with a feedback mechanism, systems can form implicit models of the environment,
              which is the basis of adaptation. Finally, when an adaptive system becomes so com-
              plex that it receives feedback from itself, a self-referential system is created that can
              potentially have all of the strengths and weaknesses of the computational basis that
              we started out with.
                  In this way, primitive computational systems can beget more sophisticated com-
              putational systems that build on previously built pieces. Looking at the orga-
              nization of nature, we find that most interesting things are composed of smaller
              interesting things. This is evident when we consider that societies, economies, and
              ecosystems are made of animals, humans, and species, which are made of cells
              that consist of amazingly complicated organelles, which are themselves composed
              of an elaborate ensemble of autocatalytic chemical reactions. Each level is nearly
              a universe in itself, since all of them use and support types of structural and func-
              tional self-similarity, multiplicity and parallelism, recursion and feedback, and self-
              reference. Nature, then, appears to be a hierarchy of computational systems that
              are forever on the edge between computability and incomputability.


24.2 Interfaces to Hierarchies

              We have seen in many examples that the novelty of a system is related to the indeter-
              minacy of the computation that it performs. Static systems are boring because they
              settle down to steady-state behavior. Overactive systems lack the coherence to re-
              tain consistent patterns from one time step to the next. In between are systems that
              are forever changing but have a consistent underlying structure or function. Such
              nonequilibrium systems are analogous to a whirlpool of water; while the molecules
              of a whirlpool are forever moving and changing, the motion of the whirlpool contains
              a suﬃcient amount of constancy that it has functional persistence.
                  This behavior, which is best seen as being on the border between computability
              and incomputability, acts as an interface between the components of hierarchically
              organized structure. Tables 24.1 and 24.2 summarize some of the phenomena that
              can be characterized in this way. As can be seen in the table, this interface between
              computability and incomputability is relevant to mathematical, fractal, chaotic,
430            Duality and Dichotomy



                       Computable               Partially Computable          Incomputable

               Sets    recursive                RE and CO-RE                  not RE
                                                                              and not CO-RE
         Numbers       rational                 computable irrational         incomputable
         Programs      trivially (never) halt   possibly halt                 —
            Proofs     true or false            profound statements           unprovable
      NP-Complete      underconstrained         critically constrained        overconstrained
        Problems⋆

      Deterministic    Euclidean                deterministic fractal         —
         Geometry
         Stochastic    —                        stochastic fractal            pure noise
         Geometry
               AC      compressible             possibly incompressible       incompressible
       Mandelbrot      white regions            border regions                black regions
               Set

        Continuous     fixed point              chaotic                       high-dimensional
         Dynamics      or periodic                                            chaos or stochastic
           Discrete    regular from             complex at                    irregular from
         Dynamics      over-sampling            mid-sampling                  under-sampling
         Attractors    integral dimensions      strange                       infinite dimensional
            Mater⋆     solid                    liquid                        gas



               Table 24.1 “Novelty” as a function of computability, part 1: Entries with a ⋆ are
               merely analogous. Not all entries listed as being “Partially Computable” are themselves
               technically incomputable, but instead represent a region between overly simple things and
               overly complex things.


               complex, and adaptive systems. In each case, the most interesting types of behavior
               fall somewhere between what is computable and what is incomputable.
                   This raises an interesting point regarding the levels at which science tries to
               discover patterns in nature. The bottom-up reductionist approach is to describe
               the functions of the lowest-level structures and to infer the structure and function
               of higher-level things based on the known rules. This is a perfect approach when
               things are computable and can be described in a closed analytical form. In such
               simple systems, all higher-level behaviors can be predicted from a basic set of rules.
                   The top-down and somewhat holistic approach is to describe things from the
               opposite direction. Experiments are made and observations are noted. From this
431             Duality and Dichotomy



                         Computable                Partially Computable          Incomputable

         Wolfram CA      class I or II             class IV                      class III
          Langton’s λ    λ < 1/3                   λ ≈ 1/2                       λ > 2/3
               Agent     globally coordinated      locally coordinated or        uncoordinated or
         Interactions    or always cooperative     competitive and               always competitive
                                                   cooperative
           NK Nets       K =1                      K=2                           2<K ≤N
           Sandpiles     flat and stable           critical                      tall and unstable
         Economics⋆      communism                 free but regulated            unrestrained
       Governments⋆      dictatorial               democracy                     anarchy

             Patterns    consistent                hidden order                  inconsistent
              Models     not self-referential      coadaptive                    hopelessly
                                                   or recurrent                  self-referential
      Search Methods     local or greedy           hybrid                        exhaustive
        Search Spaces    smooth                    complex structured            pathological


                Table 24.2 “Novelty” as a function of computability, part 2: Entries with a ⋆ are
                merely analogous. Not all entries listed as being “Partially Computable” are themselves
                technically incomputable, but instead represent a region between overly simple things and
                overly complex things.


                point, one is faced with the diﬃcult task of deriving lower-level rules from upper-
                level behaviors. While both methods of investigation have a role in science (and in
                all scientific domains), the interface between levels of organization may be such that
                neither method is really up to the job. For novel phenomena, simulation becomes
                a crucial form of investigation.


24.3 Limitations on Knowledge
                Figure 24.2 illustrates how science interacts with the universe. On the left side
                of the figure are natural processes that are recurrently coupled to themselves. On
                the right is human understanding that attempts to model the natural world. Ex-
                perimentation consists of manipulating the environment and observing the changes
                that come about. Theorizing is the process of manipulating models to see if they
                make accurate predictions of future observations. Simulation resides between the
                two, and manipulates both models and environments.
                    As stated in the last postscript, Gödel’s incompleteness result tells us that no
                theory or model can be used to make all of the predictions that we would like.
432              Duality and Dichotomy




                                             Observations




      Experimentation                                                                      Theorization

                         Natural                                       Human
                                               Simulation           Understanding
                        Processes




                                              Predictions




                    Figure 24.2   The universe of natural processes related to scientific understanding



                 Chaitin’s extension of Turing’s Halting Problem proves that there is no reliable way
                 to build theories and models. Turing’s incomputability shows us that simulations
                 and natural processes may never halt, but also that we may never be able to prove
                 this fact. Together, these three results rigorously prove that there are many things
                 about nature that we will never be able to know with any amount of eﬀort via
                 experimentation, theorization, and simulation. This is truly wonderful.
                    Think back to Chapter 8, where we first constructed the Mandelbrot set. White
                 pixels, that is, the background portions, correspond to points that we know must di-
                 verge under the Mandelbrot iterations, while black pixels correspond to points that
                 we suspect will never diverge. While every white point corresponds to something
                 that we are certain about, there are some black points (i.e., the main kidney-shaped
                 section) that we can also color with certainty. On the border are black points that
                 we merely suspect are colored correctly. It is impossible for us to determine the
                 correct color of these points with perfect certainty. It is this region, between com-
                 putability and incomputability, that contains all of the novelty and beauty of the
                 M-set. If the rules for determining the colors of the M-set points lacked this patho-
                 logical quality, the M-set would not be what it is. Instead, it would repeat itself,
433   Duality and Dichotomy



      or worse yet, simply stop yielding any patterns. But as it is, the M-set contains an
      infinite amount of complexity and beauty that can never be exhausted.
          We could make similar arguments about all of the other topics covered in the
      book. For example, these issues, as they pertain to mathematics and the theory of
      computation, mean that there is an infinite supply of programs and mathematical
      statements that will forever be just on the threshold of being understood. As soon
      as we understand them, there will remain a newly discovered and infinite collection
      of mysterious programs and mathematical statements. For the case of dynamical
      systems, while we may always make further progress in understanding particular
      systems, there will always be some processes that lie just beyond our abilities to
      predict. Similarly, for complex systems, parallel collections of simple nonlinear
      objects will always be able to produce behavior that is emergent and novel from the
      point of view that the collective behavior is far more interesting than the individual
      behaviors. And for adaptive systems, as long as perfect stability is never achieved,
      adaptation will build more complex models of environments, which further increases
      the complexity of the environments as well as the methods of adaptation.
          Nature, being composed of all of these things, will always have novelty, richness,
      and beauty that can never be exhausted. As with the M-set, we can appreciate
      nature’s beauty precisely because we can simulate it, but only to limited accuracy. If
      all natural phenomena were either perfectly describable or absolutely indescribable,
      not only would they be uninteresting, but life would be impossible.
Source Code Notes




        The process of preparing programs for a digital computer is especially attractive, not only
         because it can be economically and scientifically rewarding, but also because it can be an
                                       aesthetic experience much like composing poetry or music.
                                                                              — Donald E. Knuth




       While reading this book, you will have the opportunity to duplicate almost
       all of the figures and results by experimenting with the supplied programs. A link
       to an FTP site that contains the source code for the programs can be found at this
       book’s homepage, located at:

             http://mitpress.mit.edu/flake/

       The source code is written entirely in C and is known to work under Solaris, Linux,
       and Windows NT. This appendix gives a brief introduction on how to use the
       programs, tells where to find additional documentation, and gives a brief description
       of each program.

       Input Interface In general, all programs have a command-line interface, meaning
       that all runtime parameters for the programs are specified on the same line in
       which the command name is typed. Command-line options will usually take a
       value that is either integer, double (a double precision floating-point number),
       or a string. An option that is a switch takes no value since specifying the option
       on the command-line toggles an internal value in the program between “on” and
       “oﬀ.” For example, the command:

             prog -val 3.1415 -name "PI" -number 5 -flip

       executes the program named prog and sets three value options (-val, -name and
       -number) to three values appropriate to their type and directly following the options
       on the command-line. The final option, named -flip, is a switch and, therefore,
       takes no value.
436   Source Code Notes



               -term        Driver        Notes
                vga       Linux VGA       for Linux systems without X Windows
                x11       X Windows       for most UNIX systems
                win       Windows NT      may also work under Windows 95
                ps         PostScript     best for line plots saved to a file
                pgm          PGM          best for pixel plots saved to a file
               none            —          inhibit all graphics
                raw            —          outputs (x, y, color) triplets in ASCII


                             Table 25.1    Program terminal drivers


         In no case does any program take interactive input. Some programs may need
      to operate on an entire set of input data (such as patterns to be remembered by
      a Hopfield network), in which case, the data is specified by a string option that
      denotes the input data filename.

      Output Interface The output of a program is either plain text or graphical. If
      a program displays graphics (as most of them do), then you need to specify a value
      for the -term option that is appropriate for your computer system. This option
      tells the program which of the graphic terminal drivers to use. Table 25.1 contains
      a list of possible values to use with the -term option. Most programs that display
      graphics will have two more options named -width and -height that are used to
      specify the size of the graphics device. Additionally, the -inv switch option will
      force reverse video, and -xmag can be used to increase the size of the X Windows
      display without increasing the resolution.
          The PostScript and PGM graphic drivers do not actually display graphics but
      write the contents of the graphics in the specified file format. To save the output,
      the standard output of the program should be redirected to a file.
          For programs that do not display graphics, some output may be sent to the
      standard output and standard error text streams. Periodic text output (such as the
      current error level of a neural network being trained) is usually sent to standard
      error and the final output of the program (such as the data points for a generated
      chaotic time series) is sent to standard output. Thus, by redirecting the standard
      output stream, the periodic output will still be displayed while the final output of
      the program can be stored in a file.

      Documentation A minimal program description is given at the end of the chap-
      ters where the programs are mentioned. Detailed documentation is in the software
      distribution in the format of UNIX-style manual pages and HTML web documents.
      Moreover, programmers may wish to inspect the source code itself, since all of the
      documentation is automatically derived from the source code.
437   Source Code Notes



      Program Descriptions The programs below are listed in the order in which
      they appear in the text.

       stutter interprets simple lisp and only understands car, cdr, cons, if, set,
               equal, quote, and lambda, but is still Turing-complete. Uses stop-and-
               copy garbage collection and has an adjustable heap size. Examples that
               implement integer and floating-point arithmetic are provided. There
               is even an example stutter function to compute the square root of a
               floating-point argument with nothing but the primitives listed above.

       diffuse Generates diﬀusion limited aggregate growth that looks like coral.

          lsys Builds L-system fractals. Accepts multiple rules so that complicated
               fractals (such as a Penrose tiling) can be expressed. Great for generating
               plantlike fractals.

          mrcm Uses the Multiple Reduction Copy Machine algorithm to generate aﬃne
               fractals. Accepts an arbitrary number of transformations. Good for
               making snowflakes and mosaic patterns.

           ifs Similar to mrcm but uses Iterated Functional Systems for finer granular-
               ity.

        mandel Plots the famous Mandelbrot set. There are options for the displayed
               coordinates, zoom level, coloring schemes, etc.

         julia Generates Julia sets, which are related to the Mandelbrot set. Has
               options similar to mandel.

         gen1d Generates a time series from a one-dimensional map. Nothing fancy; it
               just shows how chaos can be seen in simple systems.

       bifur1d Plots a bifurcation diagram for a one-dimensional map to illustrate how
               a change in a single parameter can move a system from fixed-point
               behavior, to periodic, and finally to chaos. Diﬀerent regions can be
               zoomed in on.

       phase1d Plots the phase space and trajectories of a one-dimensional map. Show-
               ing trajectories in the phase space more clearly illustrates why fixed-
               points and limit cycles occur. This can also be used to show the expo-
               nential divergence of nearby trajectories.

         henon Plots the phase space of the Hénon map, a two-dimensional system with
               a fractal shape. Diﬀerent regions can be zoomed in on.
438   Source Code Notes



        henbif Plots a bifurcation diagram for the Hénon system. This is similar to
               bifur1d but shows that bifurcations apply to multidimensional systems
               as well.
       henwarp Takes a square of a specified area and “warps” it a fixed number of times
               by the Hénon system. This illustrates the stretching and folding motion
               of chaotic systems as well as shows how points within an attractor’s
               basin of attraction are eventually forced into a strange attractor.
        lorenz Plots the phase space of the Lorenz system, a three-dimensional system
               described by diﬀerential equations with a fractal shape. Both plain
               phase-space plots and delayed state-space plots are possible.
       rossler Similar to lorenz, but uses the Rossler system.
             mg Plots a two-dimensional embedding of the phase space of the Mackey-
                Glass system, a delay-diﬀerential system, with arbitrary parameters.
           gsw Simulates an individual-based three-species predator-prey ecosystem ac-
               cording to the specified parameters. The three species consist of plants,
               herbivores, and carnivores (grass, sheep, and wolves; hence the name,
               gsw). Updates are done synchronously, and each species has several
               parameters which can control their life cycles, from the ability to give
               birth, to the likelihood of starvation. Population statistics of the three
               species can be calculated over a subset of the entire grid.
      predprey Plots the phase space of a three-species predator-prey system (described
               by diﬀerential equations) which may be fractal in shape. Both plain
               phase-space plots and delayed state-space plots are possible.
         lotka Simulates the two-species Lotka-Volterra predator-prey system with a
               second-order Euler’s method. This program serves as a simple introduc-
               tion to diﬀerential equations.
        hencon Controls the Hénon system with the OGY control law for arbitrary
               choices of the system parameters. The control law is analytically cal-
               culated based on the system parameters. The user can select times in
               which control is turned on and oﬀ so that time-to-control and transients
               can be observed. Gaussian noise can be injected into the system.
             ca Simulates arbitrary one-dimensional cellular automata with an arbitrary
                choice of simulation parameters. Random rules can be generated and
                used with a desired lambda value.
          life Simulates Conway’s Game of Life with an arbitrary set of initial condi-
               tions. Input files need to be in the PBM file format.
439   Source Code Notes



             hp Simulates and plots the time evolution of the hodgepodge machine ac-
                cording to specified parameters. With a proper choice of parameters,
                this system resembles the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction which forms
                self-perpetuating spirals in a lattice.
      termites Simulates a population of termites which do a random walk while pos-
               sibly carrying a wood chip. Under normal circumstances, the termites
               will self-organize and move the wood chips into piles without a global
               leader. The termites’ behavior is dictated by the following set of rules:
               If a termite is not carrying anything and it bumps into a chip, then it
               picks it up, reverses direction, and continues with the random walk. If
               it is carrying a chip and bumps into another, it drops the chip, turns
               around, and starts walking again. Otherwise, it just does a random walk
               whether it is carrying a chip or not.
         vants Simulates and plots a population of generalized virtual ants (vants). The
               behavior of the vants is determined by a bit string with length equal to
               the number of states that each cell in the vants’ grid world can take. If
               a vant walks on a cell in state s, then the vant turns right if the s’th
               bit of the rule string is 1 and left if it is 0. As it leaves the cell the vant
               changes the state of the old cell to (s + 1) modulo the number of states.
         boids Simulates a flock of boids according to rules that determine their individ-
               ual behaviors as well as the “physics” of their universe. A boid greedily
               attempts to apply four rules with respect to its neighbors: It wants to
               fly in the same direction, be in the center of the local cluster of boids,
               avoid collisions with boids too close, and maintain a clear view ahead
               by skirting around others that block its view. Changing these rules can
               make the boids behave like birds, gnats, bees, fish, or magnetic particles.
          sipd Simulates and plots the spatial iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma over time
               according to the specified parameters. Each cell in a grid plays a specific
               strategy against its eight neighbors for several rounds. At the end of the
               last round, each cell copies the strategy of its most successful neighbor,
               which is then used for the next time step. Possible strategies include
               “Always-Cooperate,” “Always-Defect”, “Random,” “Pavlov,” and “Tit-
               for-Tat.”
          eipd Simulates the ecological iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma over time according
               to the specified parameters. At every time step the population of each
               strategy is calculated as a function of the expected scores earned against
               all strategies weighted by the populations of the opponents. Possible
               strategies include “Always-Cooperate,” “Always-Defect,” “Random,”
               “Pavlov,” and “Tit-for-Tat.”
440   Source Code Notes



         assoc Attempts to reconstruct a corrupted image with a McCulloch-Pitts feed-
               back neural network that acts as an associative memory. The weights
               of the network are determined via Hebb’s rule after reading in multiple
               patterns. Weights can be pruned either by size, by locality, or randomly.

      hopfield Solves a task assignment problem via a Hopfield neural network while
               plotting the activations of the neurons over time. The program uses the
               k-out-of-n rule for setting the external inputs and synapse strength of
               the neurons.

      gastring Uses a genetic algorithm to breed strings that match a user-specified
               target string. This program illustrates how GAs can perform a type
               of stochastic search in a space of discrete objects. Reproduction of
               strings entails crossover and mutation with strings being selected based
               on fitness.

        gabump Uses a genetic algorithm to find the maximum of a single-humped func-
               tion that is centered at a user-specified location. This program serves as
               an example of how GAs can be used to optimize functions which take a
               floating-point argument.

        gasurf Uses a genetic algorithm to find the maximum of a multi-humped func-
               tion. This program serves as an example of how GAs can be used to
               optimize functions which take multiple floating-point arguments.

        gatask Uses a genetic algorithm to solve a task assignment problem with user-
               specified costs. This program illustrates how GAs can perform combina-
               torial optimization. Reproduction of strings entails special crossover and
               mutation operations which preserve constraints on the form of feasible
               solutions.

         gaipd Uses a genetic algorithm to evolve iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma (IPD)
               strategies according to user-specified constraints. This program illus-
               trates how GAs can demonstrate coevolution since IPD strategies can
               only be successful within the context of their likely opponents.

           zcs Adapts a zeroth level classifier system (ZCS) with the implicit bucket
               brigade algorithm and a genetic algorithm so that the ZCS can tra-
               verse a two-dimensional terrain, avoid obstacles, and find food. At the
               beginning of each step the ZCS is placed at a random location of its
               world. It interacts with its environment until it finds food, which yields
               a reward. The simulation then restarts with the ZCS placed at a new
               random location. The progress of the ZCS is continuously plotted, while
               the statistics on the time to find food are calculated and displayed. At
441   Source Code Notes



                 the end of the simulation the classifiers that make up the final ZCS are
                 saved to a log file.
        zcscup Trains a zeroth level classifier system (ZCS) to solve the cups prob-
               lem with the implicit bucket brigade algorithm and a genetic algorithm.
               Solving this problem requires the ZCS to learn to remember important
               features from previous states, which makes this problem very challeng-
               ing. The ZCS always starts in the same initial position. It interacts
               with its environment until it finds both cups, which (only at that point)
               yields a reward. The simulation then restarts with the ZCS placed at
               the original location. The progress of the ZCS is continuously plotted,
               while the statistics on the time to find both cups are calculated and
               displayed. At the end of the simulation the classifiers that make up the
               final ZCS are saved to a log file.
           mlp Trains a multilayer perceptron with a single hidden layer of neurons
               on a set of data contained in a file using the backpropagation learning
               algorithm with momentum. Output units can be linear or sigmoidal,
               allowing you to model both discrete and continuous output target values.
Glossary




  A        Activation The time-varying value that is the output of a neuron.

           Activation Function A function that translates a neuron’s net input to an acti-
                vation value.

           Adaptive Subject to adaptation; can change over time to improve fitness or accuracy.

           Adaptation An internal change in a system that mirrors an external event in the sys-
               tem’s environment.

           Aﬃne An equation that can be written in terms of matrix-vector multiplication and
              vector addition.

           Agent See Autonomous Agent.

           AI An abbreviation for Artificial Intelligence.

           Algorithm A detailed and unambiguous sequence of instructions that describes how a
                computation is to proceed and can be implemented as a program.

           Algorithmic Complexity The size of the smallest program that can produce a par-
                ticular sequence of numbers. Regular patterns have low algorithmic complexity and
                random sequences have high algorithmic complexity.

           Always Cooperate A Prisoner’s Dilemma strategy that cooperates with its oppo-
               nent under all circumstances (the exact opposite of always defect).

           Always Defect A Prisoner’s Dilemma strategy that never cooperates with its op-
               ponent under any circumstance (the exact opposite of always cooperate).

           Analog Having a continuous value.

           Analytical Can be symbolically represented in a closed form that does not require any
                of the complex aspects of a program such as an iterative sum.
444       Glossary



          Analytical Solution An exact solution to a problem that can be calculated symbolically
               by manipulating equations (unlike a numerical solution).

          Arms Race Two or more species experience adaptation to one another in a coevolu-
              tionary manner. This often seen in predator-prey systems.

          Artificial Intelligence The science of making computers do interesting things that hu-
                mans do eﬀortlessly.

          Artificial Life The study of life processes within the confines of a computer.

          Associative Memory Memory that can be referenced by content, as opposed to loca-
               tion. Hopfield networks will act as associative memories when trained with the
               Hebbian learning rule.

          Asynchronous Describes events that occur independently of each other but on a similar
              time scale.

          Attractor A characterization of the long-term behavior of a dissipative dynamical
               system. Over long periods of time, the state space of some dynamical sys-
               tems will contract toward this region. Attractors may be fixed points, periodic,
               quasiperiodic, or chaotic. They may also be stable or unstable.

          Autonomous Agent An entity with limited perception of its environment that can
              process information to calculate an action so as to be goal-seeking on a local scale.
              A boid is an example of an autonomous agent.

          Axiom A statement that is assumed to be true and can later be used along with the-
              orems to prove other theorems. Also, the starting configuration of an L-System.



      B   Backpropagation An algorithm for eﬃciently calculating the error gradient of a
              neural network, which can then be used as the basis of learning. Backprop-
              agation is equivalent to the delta rule for perceptrons, but can also calculate
              appropriate weight changes for the hidden layer weights of a multilayer per-
              ceptron by generalizing the notion of an error correction term. In the simplest
              case, backpropagation is a type of steepest descent in the search space of the
              network weights, and it will usually converge to a local minimum.

          Basin of Attraction A region of state space in which all included states of a dynam-
               ical system ultimately lead into the attractor.

          Bias See threshold.
445       Glossary



          Bifurcation The splitting of a single mode of a system’s behavior into two new modes.
               This usually occurs as a function of a continuously varying control parameter.
               A cascade of bifurcations will usually precede the onset of chaos.

          Binary Written in a form that uses only 0s and 1s. A string of bits.

          Bit The smallest unit of information; the answer to a yes/no question; the outcome of a
               coin toss; a 0 or a 1.

          Boid An autonomous agent that behaves like a simplified bird but will display flocking
               patterns in the presence of other boids.

          Boolean Taking only 0/1, true/false, yes/no values.

          Bottom-Up A description that uses the lower-level details to explain higher-level pat-
               terns; related to reductionism.

          Brownian Motion A form of randomness that is the result of cumulatively adding
              white noise, to yield a random walk pattern.

          Bucket Brigade Algorithm A learning algorithm that is a method for adjusting the
              strengths of the classifiers of a classifier system. “Winning” classifiers pay
              a portion of their earnings to other classifiers that assisted them in being activated,
              similar to an economic system.

          Byte Eight bits. In programming, often used to store a single text character.



      C   Cantor Set A simple fractal set composed of an uncountable infinity of dust-like
              points, but that also has 0 measure (meaning that the sum width of all points is 0).
              The Cantor set is constructed by removing the middle third of a unit line segment,
              and then recursively removing the middle third of any remaining line segments,
              for an infinite number of steps.

          Cellular Automaton (CA) A discrete dynamical system that is composed of an
               array of cells, each of which behaves like a finite-state automaton. All interac-
               tions are local, with the next state of a cell being a function of the current state
               of itself and its neighbors. Conway’s Game of Life is a CA.

          Chaos/Chaotic Irregular motion of a dynamical system that is deterministic, sen-
              sitive to initial conditions, and impossible to predict in the long term with anything
              less than an infinite and perfect representation of analog values.
446   Glossary



      Chomsky Hierarchy Four classes of languages (or computing machines) that have in-
          creasing complexity: regular (finite-state automata), context-free (push-down
          automata), context-sensitive (linear bounded automata), and recursive (Turing
          machines).

      Classifier A rule that is part of a classifier system and has a condition that must be
           matched before its message (or action) can be posted (or eﬀected). The strength
           of a classifier determines the likelihood that it can outbid other classifiers if more
           than one condition is matched.

      Classifier System An adaptive system similar to a Post production system that
           contains many “if . . . then” rules called classifiers. The state of the environment
           is encoded as a message by a detector and placed on the message list from
           which the condition portion of the classifiers can be matched. “Winning” classifiers
           can then post their own messages to the message list, ultimately forming a type of
           computation that may result in a message being translated into an action by an
           effector. The strengths of the classifiers are modified by the bucket brigade
           algorithm, and new rules can be introduced via a genetic algorithm.

      Coevolution Two or more entities experience evolution in response to one another.
          Due to feedback mechanisms, this often results in a biological arms race.

      Complement A set composed of all elements that are not members of another set.

      Combinatorial Optimization A class of problems in which the number of candidate
          solutions is combinatorial in size. Each possible solution has an associated cost.
          The goal is to find the solution with the lowest cost. Because of the vast numbers
          involved, explicit search an entire search space is not always possible.

      Complete Describes a formal system in which all statements can be proved as being
          true or false. Most interesting formal systems are not complete, as proved in Gödel’s
          Incompleteness Theorem.

      Complex Number A number that has a real component and an imaginary component
          and is characterized as a point on a plane (instead of the real number line).

      Complex System A collection of many simple nonlinear units that operate in paral-
          lel and interact locally with each other so as to produce emergent behavior.

      Complexity An ill-defined term that means many things to many people. Complex
          things are neither random nor regular, but hover somewhere in between. Intuitively,
          complexity is a measure of how interesting something is. Other types of complexity
          may be well defined; see the index for other references.
447   Glossary



      Compressible Having a description that is smaller than itself; not random; possessing
          regularity.

      Computable Expressible as a yes/no question that can be answered in any case by a
          computer in finite time.

      Computation The realization of a program in a computer.

      Connectivity The amount of interaction in a system, the structure of the weights in
          a neural network, or the relative number of edges in a graph.

      Conservative System A dynamical system that preserves the volume of its state
          space under motion and, therefore, does not display the types of behavior found in
          dissipative systems.

      Consistence In formal systems, having the property that all statements are either
           true or false.

      Continuous Taking a real value, i.e., not strictly discrete. Dynamical systems may
           operate in continuous time or space.

      Control Exerting actions to manipulate a system or environment in a goal-seeking
           manner.

      Convergence For computers, halting with an answer; for dynamical systems, falling
          into an attractor; for searches (e.g., backpropagation and genetic algo-
          rithms), finding a location that cannot be improved upon; for infinite summations,
          approaching a definite value.

      Conway’s Game of Life A cellular automaton rule set that operates on a two-
          dimensional grid. Each cell changes its state according to the states of its eight
          nearest neighbors: dead cells come alive with exactly three live neighbors, and cells
          die if they have anything but two or three neighbors. The Game of Life can display
          complex patterns such as gliders, fish, and glider guns, and is also capable of
          universal computation.

      Co-Recursively Enumerable (CO-RE) The complement of a set that can be re-
          cursively enumerated.

      Countable Infinity Having the same number of objects as the set of natural num-
          bers.

      Crossover A genetic operator that splices information from two or more parents to form
           a composite oﬀspring that has genetic material from all parents.
448       Glossary



      D   Darwinism The theory of evolution as proposed by Charles Darwin, which combined
              variation of inheritable traits with natural selection. After the discovery of
              the physical mechanism of genetics, this was further refined into neo-Darwinism.

          Delta Rule The perceptron learning rule that specifies that weight changes should
               be proportional to the product of a weight’s input and the error (or delta) term for
               the perceptron.

          Derivative An expression that characterizes how the output of a function changes as the
               input is varied. Unlike integrals, derivatives can be calculated in an analytical
               manner very easily.

          Decision Problem A problem in which all questions take the form “Is something a
               member of a particular set?” and all answers are either “yes” or “no.”

          Detector A sensor that translates the state of a classifier’s environment into a mes-
               sage that is suitable for posting to the message list of the classifier system.

          Determinant A quantity of a matrix that characterizes the amount of expansion or
               contraction that the matrix inflicts on a vector when that vector is multiplied by
               the matrix.

          Deterministic Occurring in a non-random manner such that the next state of a system
               depends only on prior states of the system or the environment. Perfect knowledge
               of previous states implies perfect knowledge of the next state.

          Diagonal Matrix A matrix that has 0 entries along all nondiagonal entries, i.e., only
               the main diagonal may have non-zero values.

          Diﬀerence Equation An equation that describes how something changes in discrete
               time steps. Numerical solutions to integrals are usually realized as diﬀerence
               equations.

          Diﬀerential Equation A description of how something continuously changes over
               time. Some diﬀerential equations can have an analytically solution such that all
               future states can be known without simulation of the time evolution of the system.
               However, most can have a numerical solution with only limited accuracy.

          Diﬀerentiation The act of calculating a derivative; the inverse operation of calculating
               an integral.

          Diﬀusion Limited Aggregation A type of stochastic fractal formed by particles
              floating about in a random manner until they stick to something solid.

          Discrete Taking only non-continuous values, e.g., Boolean or natural numbers.
449       Glossary



          Dissipative System A dynamical system that contains internal friction that deforms
               the structure of its attractor, thus making motion such as fixed points, limit
               cycles, quasiperiodicity, and chaos possible. Dissipative systems often have
               internal structure despite being far from equilibrium, like a whirlpool that preserves
               its basic form despite being in the midst of constant change.

          Diverge For algorithms or computers, to run forever and never halt; for iterative
               systems (like the equations for the Mandelbrot set), reaching a state such that
               all future states explode in size.

          Dot Product The inner product of two vectors.

          Dynamical System A system that changes over time according to a set of fixed rules
              that determine how one state of the system moves to another state.

          Dynamics/Dynamical Pertaining to the change in behavior of a system over time.



      E   Ecology The study of the relationships and interactions between organisms and envi-
               ronments.

          Ecosystem A biological system consisting of many organisms from diﬀerent species.

          Edge of Chaos The hypothesis that many natural systems tend toward dynamical
               behavior that borders static patterns and the chaotic regime.

          Eﬀector The part of a classifier system that can translate messages into actions that
               can manipulate a system or an environment.

          Eigenvalue The change in length that occurs when the corresponding eigenvector is
               multiplied by its matrix.

          Eigenvector A unit length vector that retains its direction when multiplied to the
               matrix that it corresponds to. An (n × n) matrix can have as many as n unique
               eigenvectors, each of which will have its own eigenvalue.

          Embedding A method of taking a scalar time series and using delayed snapshots of
              the values at fixed time intervals in the past so that the dynamics of the underlying
              system can be observed as a function of the previously observed states.

          Emergent Refers to a property of a collection of simple subunits that comes about
              through the interactions of the subunits and is not a property of any single sub-
              unit. For example, the organization of an ant colony is said to “emerge” from the
              interactions of the lower-level behaviors of the ants, and not from any single ant.
450   Glossary



            Usually, the emergent behavior is unanticipated and cannot be directly deduced
            from the lower-level behaviors. Complex systems are usually emergent.

      Entropy A measure of a system’s degree of randomness or disorder.

      Environment If that which is under study is a system, then the rest of the world is the
           environment.

      Equilibrium A state of a system that, if not subjected to perturbation, will remain
           unchanged.

      Ergodic The property of a dynamical system such that all regions of a state space
          are visited with similar frequency and that all regions will be revisited (within a
          small proximity) if given enough time.

      Euclidean Pertaining to standard geometry, i.e., points, lines, planes, volumes, squares,
           cubes, triangles, etc.

      Euler’s Method The simplest method of obtaining a numerical solution of a dif-
           ferential equation. There are many other numerical techniques that are more
           accurate; however, an analytical solution (i.e., a closed form of an integral) is
           always preferred but not always possible.

      Evolution A process operating on populations that involves variation among individ-
           uals, traits being inheritable, and a level of fitness for individuals that is a
           function of the possessed traits. Over relatively long periods of time, the distri-
           bution of inheritable traits will tend to reflect the fitness that the traits convey to
           the individual; thus, evolution acts as a filter that selects fitness-yielding traits over
           other traits.

      Evolutionary Stable Strategy (ESS) In game theory and biology, a strategy that,
           when possessed by an entire population, results in an equilibrium such that muta-
           tion of the strategy can never result in an improvement for an individual. Always
           Defect is an ESS, while Always Cooperate is not.

      Excitatory Refers to a neural synapse or weight that is positive such that activity
           in the source neuron encourages activity in the connected neuron; the opposite of
           inhibitory.

      Experimentation One process by which scientists attempt to understand nature. A
          phenomenon is observed and/or manipulated so that changes in the phenomenon’s
          state can be seen. The resulting data can be used to derive new models of a
          process or to confirm an existing model. Experimentation is the complement of
          theorization. See also simulation.
451       Glossary



          Expert System A special program that resembles a collection of “if . . . then” rules.
              The rules usually represent knowledge contained by a domain expert (such as a
              physician adept at diagnosis) and can be used to simulate how a human expert
              would perform a task.



      F   Feedback A loop in information flow or in cause and eﬀect.

          Feedback Neural Network A neural network that has every neuron potentially
               connected to every other neuron. The activations of all neurons are updated
               in parallel (synchronous or asynchronous order), unlike a feedforward or
               recurrent neural network.

          Feedforward Neural Network A neural network that is organized with separate
               layers of neurons. Connections in such a network are limited to one direction such
               that the activations of the input neurons are updated first, followed by any hidden
               layers, and then finished with the outputs.

          Feigenbaum Constant A constant number that characterizes when bump-like maps
               such as the logistic map will bifurcate.

          Finite-State Automaton (FSA) The simplest computing device. Although it is not
               nearly powerful enough to perform universal computation, it can recognize reg-
               ular expressions. FSAs are defined by a state transition table that specifies how
               the FSA moves from one state to another when presented with a particular input.
               FSAs can be drawn as graphs.

          Fish A simple object in Conway’s Game of Life that swims vertically or horizontally.

          Fitness A measure of an object’s ability to reproduce viable oﬀspring.

          Fitness Landscape A representation of how mutations can change the fitness of one
               or more organisms. If high fitness corresponds to high locations in the landscape,
               and if changes in genetic material are mapped to movements in the landscape, then
               evolution will tend to make populations move in an uphill direction on the fitness
               landscape.

          Fixed Point A point in a dynamical system’s state space that maps back to itself,
               i.e., the system will stay at the fixed point if it does not undergo a perturbation.

          Formal System A mathematical formalism in which statements can be constructed
              and manipulated with logical rules. Some formal systems are built around a few
              basic axioms (such as Euclidean geometry) and can be expanded with theorems
              that can be deduced through proofs.
452       Glossary



          Fractal An object with a fractal dimension. Fractals are self-similar and may be
               deterministic or stochastic. See also Cantor Set, Diffusion Limited Aggre-
               gation, IFS, Julia Set, L-Systems, MRCM, Mandelbrot Set, and Strange
               Attractor.

          Fractal Dimension An extension of the notion of dimension found in Euclidean geom-
               etry. Fractal dimensions can be non-integer, meaning that objects can be “more than
               a line but less than a plane” and so on. There is more than one way of computing
               a fractal dimension, one common type being the Hausdorﬀ-Besicovich dimension.
               Roughly speaking, a fractal dimension can be calculated as the quotient of the log-
               arithm of the object’s size and the logarithm of the measuring scale, in the limit
               as the scale approaches 0. Under this definition, standard Euclidean objects retain
               their original dimension.

          Function A mapping from one space to another. This is usually understood to be a
               relationship between numbers. Functions that are computable can be calculated
               by a universal computer.

          Function Approximation The task of finding an instance from a class of functions
               that is minimally diﬀerent from an unknown function. This is a common task for
               neural networks.


      G   Game Theory A mathematical formalism used to study human games, economics, mili-
              tary conflicts, and biology. The goal of game theory is to find the optimal strategy
              for one player to use when his opponent also plays optimally. A strategy may incor-
              porate randomness, in which case it is referred to as a mixed strategy.

          Gaussian Normally distributed (with a bell-shaped curve) and having a mean at the
              center of the curve with tail widths proportional to the standard deviation of the
              data about the mean.

          Generalized Delta Rule Another name for backpropagation.

          Genetic Algorithm (GA) A method of simulating the action of evolution within a
              computer. A population of fixed-length strings is evolved with a GA by employing
              crossover and mutation operators along with a fitness function that deter-
              mines how likely individuals are to reproduce. GAs perform a type of search in a
              fitness landscape.

          Genetic Programming (GP) A method of applying simulated evolution on pro-
              grams or program fragments. Modified forms of mutation and crossover are
              used along with a fitness function.

          Glider A simple object in Conway’s Game of Life that swims diagonally through the
               grid space.
453       Glossary



          Glider Gun An object in Conway’s Game of Life that builds and emits gliders,
               which can then be collided in purposeful ways to construct more complicated ob-
               jects.

          Global Minimum (Maximum) In a search space, the lowest (or highest) point of
              the surface, which usually represents the best possible solution in the space with
              respect to some problem.

          Gödel Number A natural number computed via a Gödelization procedure that
               uniquely corresponds to a string.

          Gödelization A method for mapping arbitrary strings to natural numbers such that
               the process is one-to-one and invertible. The process usually exploits the prop-
               erties of prime numbers. Since Gödelization can be defined as a computable
               function, and since functions can be Gödelized, some functions (or programs)
               can assert statements about other functions or programs, or themselves.

          Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem Any suﬃciently interesting formal system can
               express true statements for which there can be no proof in the original formal
               system.

          Gödel’s Statement Given the formal statement “There does not exist any proof for
               the statement with Gödel number x applied to x,” which has it own Gödel number,
               g, Gödel’s statement paraphrased is “There does not exist a proof of the statement
               with Gödel number g applied to itself.” Gödel’s statement is true, but cannot
               be proven true in the formal system in which it is constructed, which leads to
               Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem.

          Gradient A vector of partial derivatives of a function that operates on vectors.
              Intuitively, the gradient represents the slope of a high-dimensional surface.

          Graph A construct that consists of many nodes connected with edges. The edges usually
              represent a relationship between the objects represented by the nodes. For example,
              if the nodes are cities, then the edges may have numerical values that correspond
              to the distances between the cities. A graph can be equivalently represented as a
              matrix.



      H   Halting Problem The problem of determining if a program halts or doesn’t halt on a
               particular input. This is an incomputable problem.

          Halting Set The recursively enumerable set of Gödel numbers that correspond
               to programs that halt if given their own Gödel number as input.
454       Glossary



          Hebbian Learning A rule that specifies that the strength of a synapse between two
              neurons should be proportional to the product of the activations of the two
              neurons.

          Hénon Map A chaotic system (defined by the two equations xt+1 = a − x2t + byt and
               yt+1 = xt ) that has a fractal strange attractor and operates in discrete
               time.

          Hidden Layer In a feedforward or recurrent neural network, a layer of neurons
              that is neither the input layer nor the output layer but is physically between the
              two.

          Hill-Climbing One of the simplest search methods that attempts to find a local max-
                imum by moving in an uphill direction. It is related to steepest ascent. Hill-
                climbing may use gradient information, or random sampling of nearby points, in
                order to estimate the uphill direction.

          Holism The idea that “the whole is greater than the sum of the parts.” Holism is credible
               on the basis of emergence alone, since reductionism and bottom-up descriptions
               of nature often fail to predict complex higher-level patterns. See also top-down.

          Hopfield Network A type of feedback neural network that is often used as an
               associative memory or as a solution to a combinatorial optimization problem.



      I   IFS An iterated functional system; it constructs a fractal by iterating a vector
              quantity through an affine equation that is randomly selected on each iteration.

          Imaginary Number The square root of a negative number. The square root of -1 is
               often denoted as i for the purpose of writing out complex numbers.

          Implicit Parallelism The idea that genetic algorithms have an extra built-in form
               of parallelism that is expressed when a GA searches through a search space.
               Implicit parallelism depends on the similarities and diﬀerences between individuals
               in the population. The theory posits that GAs process more schemata than there
               are strings in a population, thus getting something of a free lunch. See also no
               free lunch.

          Incomputable Something that cannot be characterized by a program that always halts.
               Sets that are incomputable may be recursively enumerable (like the halting
               set), co-recursively enumerable (e.g., the halting set’s complement), or not
               recursively enumerable (which, if also not CO-RE, is a random set).

          Incomputable Number A real number with an infinite decimal (or binary) expan-
               sion that cannot be enumerated by any universal computer.
455       Glossary



          Inheritable Refers to a trait that can be genetically passed from parent to oﬀspring.

          Inhibitory Refers to a neural synapse or weight that is negative such that activity in
               the source neuron encourages inactivity in the connected neuron. The opposite of
               excitatory.

          Inner Product For two vectors of the same   4dimensionality, the sum of the pairwise
               products of the two vector components,   xy.
                                                       i i i


          Integral The cumulative continuous sum of a function. The integral of a differen-
               tial equation represents the future state of a dynamical system; however, most
               integrals do not have an analytical solution, which means that they may only
               have numerical solutions, an admittedly inexact process.

          Integration The act of calculating an integral, by either a numerical or an analyt-
               ical solution; the inverse operation of differentiation.

          Invertible A function is invertible (with a unique inverse) if the output uniquely deter-
               mines the input (i.e., it is one-to-one) and the set of legal outputs is equal to the
               set of legal inputs. The function x2 is not strictly invertible, while x3 has an inverse.
               For operations the definition is slightly looser. While integration and differ-
               entiation are considered to be inverse operations, there are an infinite number of
               integrals that are valid results for integrating any function; thus, the process is
               not one-to-one.

          Irrational Number A real number that cannot be represented as a fraction.

          Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma The Prisoner’s Dilemma game played in an iterative
                manner for a number of rounds that is unknown to both players.

          Iterate/Iterative Doing something repeatedly. Doing something repeatedly. Doing
                something repeatedly. Doing something repeatedly. Doing something repeatedly.



      J   Julia Set A set of complex numbers that do not diverge if iterated an infinite num-
                ber of times via a simple equation. The points form an extremely complex fractal.
                There is an uncountable infinity of Julia sets, each of which corresponds to a
                particular complex number that appears as a constant in the iterative procedure.
                Julia sets are similar to co-recursively enumerable sets because only points that
                are not a members of the set can actually be identified as such. All of the Julia sets
                are related to the Mandelbrot set.



      K   Koch Curve A fractal curve that looks like the edge of a snowflake. It has no deriva-
              tive at any point.
456       Glossary



      L   Lamarckism A method of heredity that does not apply to genetics but is applicable
              to social adaptation. Lamarckism posits that acquired traits can be passed from
              parent to oﬀspring.

          Lambda Calculus A model of computation that is capable of universal computa-
              tion. The Lisp programming language was inspired by Lambda calculus.

          Learning A process of adaptation by which synapses, weights of neural network’s,
               classifier strengths, or some other set of adjustable parameters is automatically
               modified so that some objective is more readily achieved. The backpropagation
               and bucket brigade algorithms are two types of learning procedures.

          LIFE See Conway’s Game of Life.

          Limit Cycle A periodic cycle in a dynamical system such that previous states are
               returned to repeatedly.

          Linear Having only a multiplicative factor. If f (x) is a linear function, then f (a + b) =
               f (a) + f (b) and cf (x) = f (cx) must both be true for all values of a, b, c, and x.
               Most things in nature are nonlinear.

          Linearly (In)separable Two classes of points are linearly separable if a linear func-
               tion exists such that one class of points resides on one side of the hyperplane (defined
               by the linear function), and all points in the other class are on the other side. The
               XOR mapping defines two sets of points that are linearly inseparable.

          Lisp A programming language designed to manipulate lists that was inspired by Lambda
               Calculus and was the inspiration for Stutter.

          Local Minimum (Maximum) The bottom of a valley or the top of a peak; a point in
               a search space such that all nearby points are either higher (for a minimum) or
               lower (for a maximum). In a continuous search space, local minima and maxima
               have a 0 gradient vector. Note that this particular valley (or peak) may not
               necessarily be the lowest (or highest) location in the space, which is referred to as
               the global minimum (maximum).

          Logistic Map The simplest chaotic system that works in discrete time and is defined
               by the map xt = 4rxt (1 − xt ). Feigenbaum’s constant was first identified for this
               map.

          Lorenz System A system of three differential equations that was the first concrete
               example of chaos and a strange attractor.
457       Glossary



          Lotka-Volterra System A two-species predator-prey system that in its simplest
               form can display only fixed points or limit cycles. More complicated versions
               with three or more species can yield chaos.

          L-System A method of constructing a fractal that is also a model for plant growth. L-
               systems use an axiom as a starting string and iteratively apply a set of parallel
               string substitution rules to yield one long string that can be used as instructions
               for drawing the fractal. One method of interpreting the resulting string is as an
               instruction to a turtle graphics plotter. Many fractals, including the Cantor
               set, Koch curve, and Peano curve, can be expressed as an L-system.



      M   Mackey-Glass System A delay differential equation (dx/dt = (ax(t − τ ))/(1 +
              x10 (t − τ )) − bx(t)) that can display a wide variety of behaviors via an adjustable
              delay term, τ . Even though this system generates a single scalar times series, it
              can be extremely chaotic because its value at any time may depend on its entire
              previous history.

          Mandelbrot Set An extremely complex fractal that is related to Julia sets in the
              way that it is constructed and by the fact that it acts as a sort of index to the
              Julia sets. Like the Julia sets, the Mandelbrot set is calculated via an iterative
              procedure. Starting conditions that do not diverge after an infinite number of
              iterations are considered to be inside the set. If, and only if, a complex number is
              in the Mandelbrot set, then the Julia set that uses that complex number as a constant
              will be connected; otherwise, the corresponding Julia set will be unconnected.

          Map A function that is usually understood to be iterated in discrete time steps.

          Matrix A rectangular two-dimensional array of numbers that can be thought of as a
              linear operator on vectors. Matrix-vector multiplication can be used to describe
              geometric transformations such as scaling, rotation, reflection, and translation. They
              can also describe the affine transformation used to construct IFS and MRCM
              fractals.

          Mean The arithmetical average of a collection of numbers; the center of a Gaussian
              distribution.

          Meme A unit of cultural information that represents a basic idea that can be trans-
             ferred from one individual to another, and subjected to mutation, crossover, and
             adaptation.

          Message The basic unit of information in a classifier system that is stored in the
              message list. A message may correspond to an external state of an environment
              or an internal state of the classifier system.
458       Glossary



          Message List The portion of a classifier system that retains information in the form
              of messages.

          Mixed Strategy In game theory, a strategy that uses randomness by employing
              diﬀerent actions in identical circumstances with diﬀerent probabilities.

          Model In the sciences, a model is an estimate of how something works. A model will
              usually have inputs and outputs that correspond to its real-world counterpart. An
              adaptive system also contains an implicit model of its environment that allows
              it to change its behavior in anticipation of what will happen in the environment.

          Model of Computation An idealized version of a computing device that usually has
              some simplifications such as infinite memory. A Turing machine, the lambda
              calculus, and Post production systems are all models of computation.

          Monotonic The property of a function that is always strictly increasing or strictly
              decreasing, but never both. The sigmoidal activation function of a multilayer
              perceptron is monotonically increasing.

          MRCM The Multiple Reduction Copy Machine algorithm, which can be used to make
             affine fractals. MRCM fractals are related to IFS fractals in that they both use
             the same types of aﬃne transformations. The MRCM algorithm performs several
             aﬃne transformations of a seed image in parallel to yield a secondary seed image.
             The output of the MRCM is recursively passed back through to its input multiple
             times, to yield the fractal.

          Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) A type of feedforward neural network that is an
               extension of the perceptron in that it has at least one hidden layer of neurons.
               Layers are updated by starting at the inputs and ending with the outputs. Each
               neuron computes a weighted sum of the incoming signals, to yield a net input, and
               passes this value through its sigmoidal activation function to yield the neuron’s
               activation value. Unlike the perceptron, an MLP can solve linearly inseparable
               problems.

          Mutation A random change in any portion of genetic material. For a genetic algo-
              rithm, this means that a value in a bit string is randomly set.



      N   Nash Equilibrium In game theory, a pair of strategies for a game such that neither
              player can improve his outcome by changing his strategy. A Nash equilibrium some-
              times takes the form of a saddle structure. Under some cases, when a strategy is
              at a Nash equilibrium with itself, the strategy resembles an evolutionary stable
              strategy.

          Natural Number Any of the standard counting numbers; a positive integer.
459   Glossary



      Natural Selection The natural filtering process by which individuals with higher fit-
          ness are more likely to reproduce than individuals with lower fitness.

      Neo-Darwinism A synthesis of Darwinism with the mechanisms of genetics; the idea
          that adaptation equals a combination of variation, heredity, and selection. See
          also evolution, inheritable, and natural selection.

      Net Input The weighted sum of incoming signals into a neuron plus a neuron’s thresh-
           old value.

      Neural Network (NN) A network of neurons that are connected through synapses
          or weights. In this book, the term is used almost exclusively to denote an artificial
          neural network and not the real thing. Each neuron performs a simple calcula-
          tion that is a function of the activations of the neurons that are connected to it.
          Through feedback mechanisms and/or the nonlinear output response of neurons,
          the network as a whole is capable of performing extremely complicated tasks, in-
          cluding universal computation and universal approximation. Three diﬀerent
          classes of neural networks are feedforward, feedback, and recurrent neural
          networks, which diﬀer in the degree and type of connectivity that they possess.

      Neuron A simple computational unit that performs a weighted sum on incoming signals,
          adds a threshold or bias term to this value to yield a net input, and maps this
          last value through an activation function to compute its own activation. Some
          neurons, such as those found in feedback or Hopfield networks, will retain a
          portion of their previous activation.

      Newton’s Method An iterative method for finding 0 values of a function.

      Niche A way for an animal to make a living in an ecosystem.

      No Free Lunch (NFL) A theorem that states that in the worst case, and averaged
          over an infinite number of search spaces, all search methods perform equally
          well. More than being a condemnation of any search method, the NFL theorem
          actually hints that most naturally occurring search spaces are, in fact, not random.

      Nonlinear A function that is not linear. Most things in nature are nonlinear. This
           means that in a very real way, the whole is at least diﬀerent from the sum of the
           parts. See also holism.

      Not Recursively Enumerable (not-RE) An infinite set that cannot be recursively
          enumerated. Sets of this type that are also not co-recursively enumerable
          are eﬀectively random.

      NP Nondeterministic polynomial time problems; a class of computational problems that
          may or may not be solvable in polynomial time but are expressed in such a way
460       Glossary



                that candidate solutions can be tested for correctness in polynomial time. See also
                time complexity and NP-Complete.

          NP-Complete A problem type in which any instance of any other NP class problem can
              be translated to in polynomial time. This means that if a fast algorithm exists
              for an NP-complete problem, then any problem that is in NP can be solved with
              the same algorithm.

          Numerical Solution A solution to a problem that is calculated through a simulation.
             For example, solving the Three Body Problem is not possible in the worst case;
             however, with the differential equations that describe the motions of three
             bodies in space, one could simulate their movements by simulating each time step.
             Nevertheless, numerical solutions are usually error-prone due to sensitivity and,
             therefore, can be used to estimate the future for only relatively short time spans, in
             the worst case.



      O   Occam’s Razor The principle that when faced with multiple but equivalent interpreta-
              tions of some phenomenon, one should always choose the simplest explanation that
              correctly fits the data. Occam’s Razor is useful for selecting competing models for
              some phenomena.

          One-to-One A function or map that for every possible output has only one input that
               yields that particular output; if f (a) = f (b), then a = b.

          Optimization The process of finding parameters that minimizes or maximizes a func-
              tion.

          Outer Product An operation on two vectors that yields a matrix. Given two vectors
              with the same dimensionality, the outer product is a square symmetric matrix that
              contains the product of all pairs of elements from the two vectors, i.e., Aij = xi yj .



      P   Parallel/Parallelism Many things happening at once.

          Pattern Classification A task that neural networks are often trained to do. Given
               some input pattern, the task is to make an accurate class assignment to the input.
               For example, classifying many images of letters to one of the twenty-six letters of
               the alphabet is a pattern classification task.

          Payoﬀ In game theory, the amount that a player wins, given the player’s and his
              opponent’s actions.

          Peano Curve A fractal space-filling curve that can fill a plane even though it is a
              line of infinite length. Oddly enough, it has an integer fractal dimension of 2.
461   Glossary



      Perceptron The simplest type of feedforward neural network. It has only inputs
           and outputs, i.e., no hidden layers.

      Periodic Refers to motion that goes through a finite number of regions, returns to a
           previous state, and repeats the same fixed pattern forever.

      Perturbation A slight nudge.

      Phase Space In this book, another name for state space. In the scientific literature,
           “phase space” is used to denote the space of motion in a dynamical system that
           moves in continuous time, while state space is often used for discrete time
           systems.

      Phase Transition In physics, a change from one state of matter to another. In dynam-
           ical systems theory, a change from one mode of behavior to another.

      Planning In computer science, and particularly in artificial intelligence, the task of
           determining a stepwise plan to accomplish a very specific task.

      Polynomial A function in which the output is the sum of terms that are the products
           of constant values and the input raised to some integer power. The polynomial
           of a polynomial is another polynomial. From a time complexity point of view,
           polynomials are well-behaved.

      Post Production System A model of computation that resembles a collection of “if
           . . . then” rules and is capable of universal computation.

      Predator-Prey System An ecosystem in which one portion of the population con-
           sumes another. With three or more species, simple predator-prey interactions can
           lead to chaos and biological arms races. See also Lotka-Volterra system.

      Prime Number A natural number that can be evenly divided only by itself and 1.

      Prisoner’s Dilemma A non-zero-sum game in which both players have incentive not
           to cooperate under any circumstances. Thus, the optimal game theory strategy
           of always defect has the paradoxical property that both players would have a
           higher payoff if they ignored the advice of game theory.

      Probability The likelihood that a random event will occur.

      Program An algorithm that is written in a programming language for execution on a
           physical computer.
462       Glossary



          Proof A sequence of statements in which each subsequent statement is derivable from
               one of the previous statements or from an axiom of a formal system. The final
               statement of a proof is usually the theorem that one has set out to prove.



      Q   Quasiperiodic Refers to a form of motion that is regular but never exactly repeating.
               Quasiperiodic motion is always composed of multiple but simpler periodic motions.
               In the general case, for motion that is the sum of simpler periodic motions, if there
               exists a length of time that evenly divides the frequencies of the underlying motions,
               then the composite motion will also be periodic; however, if no such length of time
               exists, then the motion will be quasiperiodic.



      R   Random/Randomness Without cause; not compressible; obeying the statistics of a
              fair coin toss.

          Random Walk A walk in one or more dimensions that is dictated by the outcome of a
              coin toss. The direction of each step of the walk is specified by the coin toss. The
              resulting random motion is often referred to as Brownian motion.

          Rational Number A number that can be expressed as a fraction.

          Real Number Any number that can be represented with a potentially infinite decimal
               expansion to the right of the decimal point. Natural, rational, irrational, and
               incomputable numbers are all real numbers.

          Recurrent Neural Network A network similar to a feedforward neural network
              except that there may be connections from an output or hidden layer to the inputs.
              Recurrent neural networks are capable of universal computation.

          Recursive Strictly speaking, a set or function is recursive if it is computable; how-
              ever, in the usual sense of the word, a function is said to be recursive if its definition
              make reference to itself. For example, factorial can be defined as x! = x × (x − 1)!
              with the base case of 1! equal to 1. See also self-referential.

          Recursively Enumerable (RE) A potentially infinite set whose members can be enu-
              merated by a universal computer; however, a universal computer may not be
              able to determine that something is not a member of a recursively enumerable set.
              The halting set is recursively enumerable but not recursive.

          Reductionism The idea that nature can be understood by dissection. In other words,
              knowing the lowest-level details of how things work (at, say, the level of subatomic
              physics) reveals how higher-level phenomena come about. This is a bottom-up way
              of looking at the universe, and is the exact opposite of holism.
463       Glossary



          Regular Expression A definition for a class of strings that can be recognized by a
              finite-state automaton. An example of a class of strings that is regular would
              be legal mathematical expressions using only “+” and digits. An example that is
              not regular is the same legal mathematical expressions as before, but with properly
              nested parentheses.



      S   Saddle A type of surface that is neither a peak nor a valley but still has a 0 gradient.
               Saddle points are situated such that moving in one direction takes one uphill, while
               moving in another direction would be downhill. Hence, saddles look like the things
               that cowboys ride on.

          Scalar A single number, as opposed to a multidimensional vector or matrix.

          Schema/Schemata A similarity template used to analyze genetic algorithms. By
              using wild-card characters, a schema defines an entire class of strings that may be
              found in a population.

          Search/Search Method A method for finding a region of interest in a search space.
               Usually, the interesting regions correspond to solutions to a specific problem. Hill-
               climbing, steepest descent (ascent), simulated annealing, and genetic al-
               gorithms are all search methods.

          Search Space A characterization of every possible solution to a problem instance. For a
               neural network the search space is defined as all possible assignments to the net-
               work weights; for a genetic algorithm, it is every conceivable value assignment
               to the strings in the population.

          Selection See natural selection.

          Self-Organization A spontaneously formed higher-level pattern of structure or func-
                tion that is emergent through the interactions of lower-level objects.

          Self-Organized Criticality (SOC) A mathematical theory that describes how sys-
                tems composed of many interacting parts can tune themselves toward dynamical
                behavior that is critical in the sense that it is neither stable nor unstable but
                at a region near a phase transition. SOC systems display events in a power-law
                distribution and are never quite at equilibrium. See also edge of chaos and
                self-organization.

          Self-Referential Referring directly back to oneself through information flow, influence,
                or cause and eﬀect. See Self-Referential.

          Self-Similar An object that is structurally recursive in that a part will look like the
                whole. See also fractal.
464   Glossary



      Sensitivity The tendency of a system (sometimes chaotic) to change dramatically with
           only small perturbations.

      Set A collection of things, usually numbers. Sets may be infinite in size.

      Shadowing Lemma Implies that a numerical simulation of chaos may “shadow” a
          real trajectory of a real chaotic system.

      Sigmoidal An “S” shaped function that is often used as an activation function in
          a neural network.

      Simulate/Simulation Experimentation in the space of theories, or a combination of
           experimentation and theorization. Some numerical simulations are programs
           that represent a model for how nature works. Usually, the outcome of a simulation
           is as much a surprise as the outcome of a natural event, due to the richness and
           uncertainty of computation.

      Simulated Annealing A partially random method of search and optimization usu-
           ally used for combinatorial optimization problems. The technique is modeled on
           how the molecular structure of metals is disordered at high temperatures but very
           ordered and crystalline at low temperatures. In simulated annealing, a problem in-
           stance is reformulated so that it loosely resembles disordered material. Gradually,
           the temperature is lowered such that the ordered states correspond to good solutions
           to a problem.

      Space Complexity A function that describes the amount of memory required for a
           program to run on a computer to perform a particular task. The function is
           parameterized by the length of the program’s input. See also time complexity.

      Space-Filling Refers to a curve that manages to twist and turn in such a way that it
           actually fills a space or volume. All space-filling curves are fractal.

      Special Function In Lisp or Stutter, a built-in function that may or may not fully
           evaluate its arguments, such as the if primitive.

      Stable Having a basin of attraction that is non-zero in size; an attractor that can
           withstand some form of perturbation.

      Standard Deviation A measure of the spread of a set of data. For a Gaussian dis-
           tribution, the standard deviation hints at the width of the tails of the distribution
           function.

      Statement In a formal system, a string of characters that is formed according to
           well-defined rules such that it is legal for the language that is the formal system.
465   Glossary



            For example, in the formal system of arithmetic, the expression “5 + 3 × (2 − 4)” is
            a valid and well-formed statement, but “5+)3 × ×(2(−4)” is not.

      State Space In this book, another name for the phase space of a dynamical system.
           Roughly speaking, if the dynamics of a dynamical system can be described by n
           values, then the state space is the n-dimensional volume that the system moves
           through. Systems that are continuous in time will form a smooth trajectory
           through this volume, while discrete systems may jump to diﬀerent locations on
           subsequent time steps. In either case, if a system ever returns to a previously visited
           location in the state space, then the system is in either a fixed point or a limit
           cycle. For chaotic systems, or for programs that never halt, the system will
           always be at a previously unvisited portion of the state space.

      Steepest Descent (Ascent) A search method that uses the gradient information
           of a search space and moves in the opposite direction from the gradient until no
           further downhill (or uphill) progress can be made. See also hill-climbing.

      Stochastic Something that is random.

      Strange Attractor An attractor of a dynamical system that is usually fractal in
           dimension and is indicative of chaos.

      Strategy In game theory, a policy for playing a game. A strategy is a complete recipe
           for how a player should act in a game under all circumstances. Some policies may
           employ randomness, in which case they are referred to as mixed strategies.

      Strength For a classifier system, a classifier’s relative ability to win a bidding match
           for the right to post its message on the message list.

      String Any sequence of letters, numbers, digits, bits, or symbols.

      Stutter A silly programming language used in this book that is based on Lisp and is
           capable of universal computation.

      Symmetric Matrix A matrix with the lower-left half equal to the mirror image of the
          upper-right half.

      Synapse The junction between two neurons in which neural activity is propagated from
          one neuron to another. See also excitatory, inhibitory, and weight.

      Synchronous Acting in a lockstep fashion, with each event occurring in a precise order,
           or in such a way as to eliminate the notion of order entirely.
466       Glossary



          System Something that can be studied as a whole. Systems may consist of subsystems
               that are interesting in their own right. Or they may exist in an environment
               that consists of other similar systems. Systems are generally understood to have
               an internal state, inputs from an environment, and methods for manipulating the
               environment or themselves. Since cause and eﬀect can flow in both directions of
               a system and environment, interesting systems often posses feedback, which is
               self-referential in the strongest case.



      T   Theorem A statement in a formal system that has proof.

          Theorization A process by which scientists attempt to understand nature; it is the com-
              plement to experimentation. Theorization is the process of building mathematical
              models for how things work. Scientists always desire theories that are simpler than
              the data they explain. See also Occam’s Razor and simulation.

          Three Body Problem The problem of determining the future positions and velocities
              of three gravitational bodies. The problem was proved unsolvable in the general
              case by Henri Poincaré, which forshadowed the importance of chaos. Although no
              analytical solutions are possible in the worst case, a numerical solution is
              sometimes suﬃcient for many tasks.

          Threshold A quantity added to (or subtracted from) the weighted sum of inputs into a
               neuron, which forms the neuron’s net input. Intuitively, the net input (or bias)
               is proportional to the amount that the incoming neural activations must exceed
               in order for a neuron to fire.

          Time Complexity A function that describes the amount of time required for a pro-
              gram to run on a computer to perform a particular task. The function is parame-
              terized by the length of the program’s input. See also space complexity.

          Time-Reversible A property of dynamical systems that can be run unambiguously
              both forward and backward in time. The Hénon map, Lorenz system, and vant
              cellular automata are all time-reversible, while the logistic map, the Mackey-
              Glass system, and most other cellular automata are not. Time-reversible
              systems are described by functions that are invertible.

          Time Series A sequence of values generated from a dynamical system over time.
              Chaotic systems can be analyzed by examining the time series generated by a
              single portion of the system. See also embedding.

          Tit-for-Tat An eﬀective strategy for playing the Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma. Tit-
                for-Tat starts by cooperating, and then does whatever its opponent did in the pre-
                vious round of play.
467       Glossary



          Top-Down A method of examining things that first looks at higher-level phenomena and
              then tries to explain lower-level patterns in terms of the higher-level observations.
              This is the exact opposite of bottom-up. See also holism and reductionism.

          Transpose An operation that flips a matrix about the main diagonal.

          Turing Machine A model of computation that uses an underlying finite-state au-
               tomaton but also has an infinite tape to use as memory. Turing machines are
               capable of universal computation.

          Turtle Graphics A simple language for drawing graphics in which a “turtle” is used
               to make strokes on a plotting device. Typical commands include “move forward,”
               “draw forward,” and “turn left.”



      U   Uncountable Infinity An order of infinity that is larger than the number of natural
              numbers. The number of real numbers is uncountably infinite.

          Universal Approximation Having the ability to approximate any function to an ar-
               bitrary degree of accuracy. Neural networks are universal approximators.

          Universal Computation Capable of computing anything that can in principle be com-
               puted; being equivalent in computing power to a Turing machine, the lambda
               calculus, or a Post production system.

          Universal Computer A computer that is capable of universal computation, which
               means that given a description of any other computer or program and some data,
               it can perfectly emulate this second computer or program. Strictly speaking, home
               PCs are not universal computers because they have only a finite amount of memory.
               However, in practice, this is usually ignored.

          Unstable Having a basin of attraction that is 0 in size; being such that the slightest
               perturbation will forever change the state of a system. A pencil balanced on its
               point is unstable.



      V   Value Function A built-in function in Lisp or Stutter that evaluates all of its argu-
               ments prior to being executed, e.g., car, cdr, and cons.

          Vant A virtual ant; a type of cellular automaton that vaguely emulates the activity
               of one or more ants.

          Variation Genetic diﬀerences among individuals in a population.
468       Glossary



          Vector A one-dimensional array of numbers that can be used to represent a point in a
               multidimensional space.



      W   Weight In a neural network, the strength of a synapse (or connection) between two
              neurons. Weights may be positive (excitatory) or negative (inhibitory). The
              thresholds of a neuron are also considered weights, since they undergo adaptation
              by a learning algorithm.

          White Noise Noise that uniformly distributed in the frequency domain; randomness
              that is uniformly distributed; thus, a white noise process with a range of 0 to 1
              would yield a random number in this range with probability equal for all possible
              values. Brown noise is a result of cumulatively adding white noise.



      X   XOR The exclusive-or function; given two Boolean inputs, the output of XOR is 1 if
             and only if the two inputs are diﬀerent; otherwise, the output is 0.



      Z   Zero-Sum Game In game theory, a game in which a win for one player results in an
               equal but opposite loss for the other players.
Bibliography




        Abelson, H., Sussman, G. J., & Sussman, J. (1996). Structure and interpretation of com-
            puter programs. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
        Arbib, M. A. (1966). Self-reproducing automata—some implications for theoretical biology.
            In C. H. Waddington (Ed.), Towards a theoretical biology, volume 2 (pp. 204–226).
            Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
        Arneodo, A., Coullet, P., & Tresser, C. (1980). Occurrence of strange attractors in three-
            dimensional Volterra equations. Phys. Lett. A, 79A(4): 259–63.
        Ashby, W. R. (1966). An introduction to cybernetics. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
        Awad, E. M. (1996). Building expert systems: Principles, procedures, and applications.
           Minneapolis/St.Paul: West/Wadsworth.
        Axelrod, R. (1984). The evolution of cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
        Axelrod, R. & Hamilton, W. D. (1981). The evolution of cooperation. Science, 211(4489):
            1390–1396.
        Bai-Lin, H. (Ed.). (1984). Chaos. Singapore: World Scientific.
        Bak, P. (1996). How nature works: The science of self-organized criticality. New York:
            Springer-Verlag.
        Bak, P. & Chen, K. (January 1991). Self-organized criticality. Sci. Am., 264(1).
        Bak, P., Tang, C., & Wiesenfeld, K. (1988). Self-organized criticality. Phys. Rev. A, 38(1):
             364–374.
        Barlow, C. (1991). From Gaia to selfish genes: Selected writings in the life sciences.
             Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
        Barnsley, M. (1988). Fractals everywhere. New York: Academic Press.
        Barnsley, M. (1989). Iterated function systems. In Chaos and Fractals: The Mathematics
            Behind the Computer Graphics, volume 39 of Proc. Symposia Appl. Math., Provi-
            dence, R.I. American Mathematical Society.
        Beckmann, P. (1977). A history of π (Fourth ed.). Boulder, Colo.: Golem Press.
        Benhabib, J. (Ed.). (1992). Cycles and chaos in economic equilibrium. Princeton: Prince-
            ton University Press.
        Bennett, C. H., Gács, P., Li, M., Vitanyi, P. M. B., & Zurek, W. H. (1993). Thermodynam-
            ics of computation and information distance. In Proceedings of the twenty-fifth annual
            ACM symposium on theory of computing, (pp. 21–30)., San Diego. ACM Press.
470   Bibliography



      Bennett, C. H. & Landauer, R. (July 1985). Fundamental physical limits of computation.
          Sci. Am., 253(1): 48–56.
      Berlekamp, E., Conway, J. H., & Guy, R. (1982). Winning ways for your mathematical
           plays. London: Academic Press.
      Blum, L., Cucker, F., Shub, M., & Smale, S. (1995). Complexity and real computation: A
          manifesto. Technical Report TR-95-042, International Computer Science Institute,
          Berkeley, Calif.
      Blum, L., Shub, M., & Smale, S. (1988). On a theory of computation over the real numbers;
          NP completeness, recursive functions and universal machines (extended abstract). In
          29th annual symposium on foundations of computer science, (pp. 387–397)., White
          Plains, N.Y. IEEE.
      Bowler, P. J. (1996). Charles Darwin: The Man and his influence. Cambridge: Cambridge
          University Press.
      Boyd, R. & Richerson, P. J. (1985). Culture and the evolutionary process. Chicago:
          University of Chicago Press.
      Breder, C. M. (1951). Studies in the structure of the fish school. Bull. Am. Mus. Nat.
          Hist., 98(3): 7ﬀ.
      Bremmerman, H. J. (1962). Optimization through evolution and recombination. In M. C.
          Yovits, G. T. Jacobi, & G. D. Goldstein (Eds.), Self-organizing systems (pp. 93ﬀ).
          Washington, D.C.: Spartan Books.
      Bryson, A. E. & Ho, Y. C. (1969). Applied optimal control. New York: Blaisdell.
      Burks, A. W. (1961). Notes on John von Neumann’s cellular self-reproducing automa-
          ton. Technical Report 108, Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois,
          Urbana.
      Burks, A. W. (1974). Cellular automata and natural systems. In Keidel, W. D., Händler,
          W., & Spreng, M. (Eds.), Cybernetics and bionics, (pp. 190–204)., Munich. R. Old-
          enbourg.
      Cairns-Smith, A. G. (1966). The origin of life and the nature of the primitive gene. J.
           Theor. Biol., 10(1): 53–88.
      Cairns-Smith, A. G. (1985). Seven clues to the origin of life. Cambridge: Cambridge
           University Press.
      Capra, F. (1996). The web of life: A new scientific understanding of living systems. New
          York: Doubleday.
      Casti, J. L. (1989). Alternate realities: Mathematical models of nature and man. New
           York: John Wiley & Sons.
      Casti, J. L. (1994). Complexification: Explaining a paradoxical world through the science
           of surprise. New York: HarperCollins.
      Caudill, M. & Butler, C. (1990). Naturally intelligent systems. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
          Press.
      Chaitin, G. J. (1966). On the length of programs for computing finite binary sequences.
          J. ACM, 13(4): 547–569.
471   Bibliography



      Chaitin, G. J. (1969). On the simplicity and speed of programs for computing infinite sets
          of natural numbers. J. ACM, 16(3): 407–422.
      Chaitin, G. J. (January 1970). To a mathematical definition of “life”. ACM SIGACT
          News, 4: 12–18.
      Chaitin, G. J. (1975). A theory of program size formally identical to information theory.
          J. ACM, 22(3): 329–340.
      Chaitin, G. J. (1997). The limits of mathematics: A course on information theory & limits
          of formal reasoning. Singapore: Springer-Verlag.
      Charles-Edwards, D. A. (1986). Modelling plant growth and development. New York:
          Academic Press.
      Cheeseman, P., Kanefsky, B., & Taylor, W. M. (1991). Where the really hard problems
          are. In Mylopoulos, J. & Reiter, R. (Eds.), Proceedings IJCAI-91, (pp. 331–336).,
          Sydney.
      Chomsky, N. (1956). Three models for the description of language. IRE Trans. Info.
         Theory, 1: 113–124.
      Chomsky, N. (1959). On certain formal properties of grammars. Info. and Control, 2(2):
         137–167.
      Chomsky, N. & Miller, G. A. (1958). Finite state languages. Info. and Control, 1(2):
         91–112.
      Church, A. (1936). A note on the Entscheidungsproblem. J. Symbol. Logic, 1: 40–41 and
          101–102.
      Church, A. (1951). The Calculi of Lambda-Conversion, volume 6 of Annals of Mathematical
          Studies. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
      Clark, W. R. (1995). At war within: The double-edged sword of immunity. New York:
           Oxford University Press.
      Conrad, M. & Pattee, H. H. (1970). Evolution experiments with an artificial ecosystem.
          J. Theor. Biol., 28(3): 393–409.
      Cook, S. A. (1971). The complexity of theorem-proving procedures. In Conference record
          of third annual ACM symposium on theory of Computing, (pp. 151–158)., Shaker
          Heights, Oh. ACM.
      Cowan, G., Pines, D., & Meltzer, D. (Eds.). (1994). Complexity: Metaphors, models,
          and reality, volume XIX of Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity.
          Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
      Crutchfield, J. P. (1994). The calculi of emergence: Computation, dynamics and induction.
          Physica D, 75(1–3): 11–54.
      Crutchfield, J. P. & Young, K. (1989a). Computation at the onset of chaos. In W. Zurek
          (Ed.), Complexity, entropy and the physics of information. Reading, Mass.: Addison-
          Wesley.
      Crutchfield, J. P. & Young, K. (1989b). Inferring statistical complexity. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
          63(2): 105–108.
472   Bibliography



      Darwin, C. (1859). On the origin of species. London: John Murray.
      DasGupta, B., Siegelmann, H., & Sontag, E. (1994). On the intractability of loading neural
          networks. In V. Roychowdhury, K.-Y. Siu, & A. Orlitsky (Eds.), Theoretical advances
          in neural computation and learning. Boston: Kluwer.
      Dauben, J. W. (1990). Georg Cantor: His mathematics and philosophy of the infinite.
          Princeton: Princeton University Press.
      Davis, M. (Ed.). (1965). The undecidable. New York: Raven Press.
      Dawkins, R. (1976). The selfish gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Dawkins, R. (1983). The extended phenotype: The gene as a unit of selection. Oxford:
         Oxford University Press.
      Dawkins, R. (1986). The blind watchmaker. New York: W. W. Norton.
      Dennett, D. C. (1978). Brainstorms: Philosophical essays on mind and psychology. Cam-
          bridge, Mass.: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
      Derrida, B. & Pomeau, Y. (1986). Random networks of automata: A simple annealed
           approximation. Europhys. Lett., 1(2): 45–49.
      Descartes, R. (1987). Méditations on first philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University
          Press.
      Dewdney, A. K. (1984). Computer Recreations: Sharks and fish wage an ecological war
         on the toroidal planet wa-tor. Sci. Am., 251(6): 14–22.
      Dewdney, A. K. (1985). Computer Recreations: Exploring the field of genetic algorithms
         in a primordial computer sea full of flibs. Sci. Am., 253(5): 21–32.
      Dewdney, A. K. (August 1988). The hodgepodge machine makes waves. Sci. Am., 225(8):
         104–107.
      Dewdney, A. K. (1989). The Turing omnibus: 61 excursions in computer science. Rockville,
         Md.: Computer Science Press.
      Dewdney, A. K. (1993). 200 percent of nothing: An eye-opening tour through the twists
         and turns of math abuse and innumeracy. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
      Doyle, J. C., Francis, B. A., & Tannenbaum, A. R. (1992). Feedback control theory. New
          York: MacMillan.
      Edelman, G. M. (1987). Neural darwinism: The theory of neuronal group selection. New
          York: Basic Books.
      Eigen, M. & Winkler, R. (1982). The laws of the game: How the principles of nature
          govern chance. New York: Harper Colophon.
      Esbensen, B. J. & Davie, H. K. (1996). Echoes for the Eye: Poems to celebrate patterns
          in nature. New York: HarperCollins.
      Faltings, G. (1995). The proof of Fermat’s Last Theorem by R. Taylor and A. Wiles.
           Notices Amer. Math. Soc., 42(7): 743–746.
      Farmer, D. & Kauﬀman, S. (1988). Biological modelling: What’s evolving in artificial life.
          Nature, 331(6155): 390–391.
473   Bibliography



      Farmer, D., Toﬀoli, T., & Wolfram, S. (Eds.). (1983). Cellular Automata: Proceedings of
          an Interdisciplinary Workshop, Amsterdam. North-Holland.
      Farmer, J. D. (1990). Rosetta stone for connectionism. Physica D, 42(1–3): 153–187.
      Farmer, J. D., Lapedes, A., Packard, N. H., & Wendroﬀ, B. (1986). Evolution, games and
          learning. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
      Farmer, J. D., Ott, E., & Yorke, J. A. (1983). The dimension of chaotic attractors. Physica
          D, 7(1–3): 153–180.
      Farmer, J. D., Packard, N. H., & Perelson, A. S. (1986). The immune system, adaptation
          & learning. Physica D, 22(1–3): 187–204.
      Feigenbaum, M. J. (1978). Quantitative universality for a class of nonlinear transforma-
           tions. J. Stat. Phys., 19(1): 25–52.
      Feigenbaum, M. J. (1979). The universal metric properties of nonlinear transformations.
           J. Stat. Phys., 21(6): 669–706.
      Field, R. J. & Noyes, R. M. (1974). Oscillations in chemical systems. V. Quantitative
           explanation of band migration in the Belousov-Zhabotinskii reaction. J. Am. Chem.
           Soc., 96(7): 2001–2006.
      Fogel, L. J., Owens, A. J., & Walsh, M. J. (1966). Artificial Intelligence through Simulated
           Evolution. New York: Wiley.
      Forrest, S. & Mayer-Kress, G. (1991). Using genetic algorithms in nonlinear dynamical
           systems and international security models. In L. Davis (Ed.), The genetic algorithms
           handbook (pp. 166–185). New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
      Fowler, D. R., Meinhardt, H., & Prusinkiewicz, P. (1992). Modeling seashells. Comp.
          Graphics, 26(2): 379–387.
      Fredkin, E. & Toﬀoli, T. (1982). Conservative logic. Int. J. Theor. Phys., 21(3–4): 219–253.
      Gale, D. & Propp, J. (1994). Further ant-ics. Math. Intell., 16(1): 37–42.
      Gardner, M. (1961). More mathematical puzzles and diversions. New York: Penguin.
      Gardner, M. (October 1970). Mathematical Games: The fantastic combinations of John
          Conway’s new solitaire game ‘Life’. Sci. Am., 223(4): 120–123.
      Gardner, M. (1971). Mathematical Games: On cellular automata, self-reproduction, the
          Garden of Eden and the game of “Life”. Sci. Am., 224(2): 112–117.
      Gardner, M. (April 1978). Mathematical Games: White and brown music, fractal curves
          and 1/f fluctuations. Sci. Am., 238: 16–32.
      Gardner, M. (1983). Wheels, life, and other mathematical amusements. New York: W. H.
          Freeman.
      Garey, M. R. & Johnson, D. S. (1979). Computers and intractability: A guide to the theory
          of NP-completeness. New York: W. H. Freeman.
      Garfinkel, A., Spano, M. L., & Ditto, W. L. (1992). Controlling cardiac chaos. Science,
           257(5074): 1230.
      Gell-Mann, M. (1995). The quark and the jaguar: Adventures in the simple and the
           complex. New York: W. H. Freeman.
474   Bibliography



      Gerhardt, M., Schuster, H., & Tyson, J. J. (1991). A cellular automaton model of excitable
          media IV. Untwisted scroll rings. Physica D, 50(2): 189–206.
      Gleick, J. (1987). Chaos. New York: Viking.
      Gödel, K. (1931). Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia mathematica und
           verwandter Systeme I. Monats. für Math. und Phys., 38: 173–198.
      Gödel, K. (1932). Ein spezialfall des entscheidungsproblem der theoretischen logik. Ergebn.
           math. Kolloq., 2: 27–28.
      Gödel, K. (1965). On intuitionistic arithmetic and number theory. In M. Davis (Ed.), The
           undecidable (pp. 75–81). New York: Raven Press.
      Gödel, K. (1986). On completeness and consistency. In S. Feferman, J. W. Dawson, Jr.,
           S. C. Kleene, G. H. Moore, R. M. Solovay, & J. Van Heijenoort (Eds.), Kurt Gödel:
           Collected works, volume 1 (pp. 235–237). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Goldberg, D. E. (1989). Genetic algorithms in search, optimization, and machine learning.
          Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
      Goldstine, H. H. (1993). The computer from Pascal to von Neumann. Princeton: Princeton
          University Press.
      Gonick, L. & Smith, W. (1993). The cartoon guide to statistics. New York: HarperCollins.
      Grebogi, C., Ott, E., & Yorke, J. A. (1987). Chaos, strange attractors, and fractal basin
          boundaries in nonlinear dynamics. Science, 238(4827): 632–638.
      Hall, N. (Ed.). (1991). Exploring chaos: A guide to the new science of disorder. New York:
           W. W. Norton & Co.
      Hamilton, W. (1964). The genetical evolution of social behavior. J. Theor. Biol., 7: 1–31.
      Haykin, S. (1994). Neural networks: A comprehensive foundation. New York: MacMillan.
      Hebb, D. O. (1949). The organization of behavior. New York: Wiley & Sons.
      Hènon, M. (1976). A two-dimensional mapping with a strange attractor. Comm. Math.
           Phys., 50(1): 69–77.
      Hertz, J., Krogh, A., & Palmer, R. G. (1991). Introduction to the theory of neural compu-
          tation. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
      Hillis, W. D. (1992). Co-evolving parasites improve simulated evolution as an optimization
            procedure. In C. G. Langton, C. Taylor, J. D. Farmer, & S. Rasmussen (Eds.),
            Artificial life II, volume 10 of Sante Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity
            (pp. 313–324). Redwood City, Calif.: Addison-Wesley.
      Hirst, B. & Mandelbrot, B. (1995). Fractal landscapes from the real world. New York:
           Distributed Art Publishers.
      Hodges, A. (1983). Alan Turing: The enigma. New York: Simon and Schuster.
      Hofstadter, D. R. (1979). Gödel, Escher, Bach: An eternal golden braid. New York: Basic
           Books.
      Hofstadter, D. R. (1985). Metamagical themas: Questing for the essence of mind and
           pattern. New York: Basic Books.
475   Bibliography



      Hogeweg, P. (1988). Cellular automata as a paradigm for ecological modelling. App. Math.
          & Comp., 27(1).
      Hogg, T., Huberman, B. A., & McGlade, J. M. (1989). The stability of ecosystems. Proc.
          Royal Soc. of London, B237(1286): 43–51.
      Hogg, T., Huberman, B. A., & Williams, C. P. (1996). Phase transitions and the search
          problem. Art. Intell., 81(1–2): 1–15.
      Holland, J. H. (1962). Outline for a logical theory of adaptive systems. J. ACM, 9:
           297–314.
      Holland, J. H. (1967). Nonlinear environments permitting eﬃcient adaptation. In J. T.
           Tou (Ed.), Computer and information sciences II. New York: Academic Press.
      Holland, J. H. (1975). Adaptation in natural and artificial systems. Ann Arbor: University
           of Michigan Press.
      Holland, J. H. (1976). Adaptation. In R. Rosen & F. M. Snell (Eds.), Progress in theoretical
           biology IV (pp. 263–293). New York: Academic Press.
      Holland, J. H., Holyoak, K. J., Nisbett, R. E., & Thagard, P. R. (1989). Induction:
           Processes of inference, learning and discovery. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
      Holldobler, B. & Wilson, E. O. (1990). The ants. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of
           Harvard University Press.
      Hopcroft, J. E. & Ullman, J. D. (1979). Introduction to automata theory, languages, and
          computation. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
      Hopfield, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective
          computational abilities. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 79(8): 2554–2558.
      Hopfield, J. J. & Tank, D. W. (August 1986). Computing with neural networks: A model.
          Science, 233(4764): 625–633.
      Hornik, K., Stinchcombe, M., & White, H. (1989). Multilayer feedforward networks are
          universal approximators. Neural Networks, 2(5): 359–366.
      Isenberg, C. (1978). The science of soap films and soap bubbles. Avon, U.K.: Tiero.
      Judd, J. S. (1990). Neural network design and the complexity of learning. Cambridge,
          Mass.: MIT Press.
      Kaelbling, L. P. (Ed.). (1996). Recent advances in reinforcement learning. Boston: Kluwer
          Academic.
      Kauﬀman, S. (August 1991). Antichaos and adaptation. Sci. Am., 265(2): 64–70.
      Kauﬀman, S. (1995). At home in the universe: The search for laws of self-organization
          and complexity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Kauﬀman, S. A. (1969). Metabolic stability and epigenesis in randomly constructed genetic
          nets. J. Theor. Biol., 22(3): 437–467.
      Kauﬀman, S. A. (1984). Emergent properties in random complex automata. Physica D,
          10(1–2): 145–56.
      Kauﬀman, S. A. (1986). Autocatalytic sets of proteins. J. Theor. Biol., 119(1): 1–24.
476   Bibliography



      Kauﬀman, S. A. (1993). Origins of order: Self-organization and selection in evolution.
          Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Kauﬀman, S. A. & Smith, R. G. (1986). Adaptive automata based on Darwinian selection.
          Physica D, 22(1–3): 68–82.
      Kirchgraber, U. & Stoﬀer, D. (1990). Chaotic behaviour in simple dynamical systems.
           SIAM Review, 32(3): 424–452.
      Kohonen, T. (1977). Associative memory. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
      Koiran, P., Cosnard, M., & Garzon, M. (1994). Computability with low-dimensional
          dynamical systems. Theoret. Comp. Sci., 132(1): 113–128.
      Kolmogorov, A. N. (1965). Three approaches to the quantitative definition of information.
          Prob. Info. Trans., 1(1): 1–7.
      Kolmogorov, A. N. (1968). Some theorems on algorithmic entropy and the algorithmic
          quantity of information. UMN: Uspekhi Matematicheskikh Nauk, 23.
      Koza, J. R. (1992). Genetic programming: On the programming of computers by natural
          selection. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
      Kuang, Y. (1993). Delay diﬀerential equations with applications in population dynamics.
          New York: Academic Press.
      Langton, C. (1984). Self-reproduction in cellular automata. Physica D, 10(1–2): 135–144.
      Langton, C. (1986). Studying artificial life with cellular automata. Physica D, 22(1–3):
          120–149.
      Langton, C. G. (Ed.). (1989). Artificial Life, volume 6 of Santa Fe Institute studies in the
          sciences of complexity, Reading, Mass. Addison-Wesley.
      Langton, C. G., Taylor, C., Farmer, J. D., & Rasmussen, S. (Eds.). (1992). Artificial Life
          II, volume 10 of Santa Fe Institute studies in the sciences of complexity, Reading,
          Mass. Addison-Wesley.
      Lapedes, A. & Farber, R. (1987). Nonlinear signal processing using neural networks:
          Prediction and system modelling. Technical Report LA-UR-87-2662, Los Alamos
          National Laboratory, Los Alamos, N.M.
      Lapedes, A. & Farber, R. (1988). How neural nets work. In D. Z. Anderson (Ed.),
          Neural information processing sytems (pp. 442–456). New York: American Institute
          of Physics.
      Levy, S. (1992). Artificial life: A report from the frontier where computers meet biology.
          New York: Vintage Books.
      Li, T. Y. & Yorke, J. A. (1975). Period three implies chaos. Am. Math. Monthly, 82(10):
           985–992.
      Li, W., Packard, N., & Langton, C. G. (1990). Transition phenomena in CA rule space.
           Physica D, 45(1–3): 77–94.
      Lin, L.-J. & Mitchell, T. M. (1992). Memory approaches to reinforcement learning in
           non-Markovian domains. Technical Report CMU//CS-92-138, Carnegie Mellon Uni-
           versity, School of Computer Science, Pittsburgh, Pa.
477   Bibliography



      Lindenmayer, A. (1968). Mathematical models for cellular interactions in development, I
          & II. J. Theor. Biol., 18: 280–315.
      Lindenmayer, A. & Rozenberg, G. (1972). Developmental systems and languages. In
          Conference record, fourth annual ACM symposium on theory of computing, (pp. 214–
          221)., Denver, Colorado.
      Lorenz, E. N. (1963). Deterministic nonperiodic flow. J. Atmos. Sci., 20: 130–141.
      Lotka, A. (1910). Zur theorie der periodischen reaktionen. Z. phys. Chemie, 72: 508.
      Lovelock, J. E. (1983). Daisy World: A cybernetic proof of the Gaia hypothesis. CoEvol.
          Quart., 38(summer): 66–72.
      Lumsden, C. J. & Wilson, E. O. (1981). Genes, mind, and culture: The coevolutionary
         process. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
      Mackey, M. C. & Glass, L. (1977). Oscillation and chaos in physiological control systems.
          Science, 2(4300): 287–289.
      MacRae, N. (1992). John von Neumann: The scientific genius who pioneered the modern
         computer, game theory, nuclear deterrence, and much more. New York: Pantheon
         Books.
      Mandelbrot, B. (1978). Fractals: Form, chance, and dimension. New York: W. H. Free-
         man.
      Mandelbrot, B. (1983). The fractal geometry of nature. New York: W. H. Freeman.
      March, R. H. (1995). Physics for poets. New York: McGraw-Hill.
      Margolus, N. (1984). Physics-like models of computation. Physica D, 10(1–2): 81–95.
      Margulis, L. (1981). Symbiosis in cell evolution. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
      May, R. M. (1972). Limit cycles in predator-prey communities. Science, 177: 900–902.
      May, R. M. (1974). Biological populations with nonoverlapping generations: Stable points,
          stable cycles, and chaos. Science, 186(4164): 645–647.
      May, R. M. (1976). Simple mathematical models with very complicated dynamics. Nature,
          261(5560): 459–467.
      Mayer-Kress, G. (1992). Nonlinear dynamics and chaos in arms race models. In L. Lam &
          V. Naroditsky (Eds.), Modeling complex phenomena (pp. 153–183). Berlin: Springer.
      Maynard Smith, J. (1975). The theory of evolution (third ed.). New York: Penguin.
      Maynard Smith, J. (1982). Evolution and the theory of games. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
      Maynard Smith, J. (1986). The problems of biology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      McCarthy, J. (1960). LISP 1 programmer’s manual. Technical report, Computation Center
         and Research Laboratory of Electronics, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
      McCulloch, W. S. & Pitts, W. (1943). A logical calculus of the idea immanent in nervous
         activity. Bull. Math. Biophys., 5: 115–133.
      Meinhardt, H. (1995). The algorithmic beauty of sea shells. New York: Springer.
478   Bibliography



      Michalewicz, Z. (1996). Genetic algorithms + data structures = evolution programs. New
          York: Springer-Verlag.
      Minsky, M. (1972). Computation: Finite and infinite machines. London: Prentice-Hall.
      Minsky, M. (1979). The society theory of thinking. In P. H. Winston & R. H. Brown
          (Eds.), Artificial intelligence: An MIT persective (pp. 423–450). Cambridge, Mass.:
          MIT Press.
      Minsky, M. (1987). The society of mind. London: Heinemann.
      Minsky, M. & Papert, S. (1988). Perceptrons (expanded ed.). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
          Press.
      Mitchell, M. (1996). An introduction to genetic algorithms. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
      Moore, C. (1990). Unpredictability and undecidability in dynamical systems. Phys. Rev.
          Lett., 64(20): 2354–2357.
      Moore, C. (1991a). Generalized one-sided shifts and maps of the interval. Nonlinearity,
          4(3): 727–745.
      Moore, C. (1991b). Generalized shifts: Unpredictability and undecidability in dynamical
          systems. Nonlinearity, 4(2): 199–230.
      Moore, C. (1996). Recursion theory on the reals and continuous-time computation. Theor.
          Comp. Sci., 162(1): 23–44.
      Nicolis, G. & Prigogine, I. (1977). Self-organization in nonequilibrium systems. New York:
           John Wiley & Sons.
      Nijhout, H. F. (November 1981). The color patterns of butterflies and moths. Sci. Am.,
           245(5).
      Nilsson, N. J. (1965). Learning machines: Foundations of trainable pattern classifying
           systems. New York: McGraw-Hill.
      Nowak, M. & Sigmund, K. (1993). A strategy of win-stay, lose-shift that outperforms
          Tit-for-Tat in the Prisoner’s Dilemma game. Nature, 364(6432): 56–58.
      Nowak, M. A. & May, R. M. (1992). Evolutionary games and spatial chaos. Nature,
          359(6398): 826–829.
      Nowak, M. A., May, R. M., & Sigmund, K. (June 1995). The arithmetics of mutual help.
          Sci. Am., 272(6): 76–81.
      Omohundro, S. (1984). Modelling cellular automata with partial diﬀerential equations.
         Physica D, 10D(1–2): 128–134.
      Ore, O. (1988). Number theory and its history. New York: Dover.
      O’Rourke, J. (1994). Computational geometry in C. Cambridge: Cambridge University
          Press.
      Ott, E., Grebogi, C., & Yorke, J. A. (1990a). Controlling chaos. Phys. Rev. Lett., 64(11):
           1196–1199.
      Ott, E., Grebogi, C., & Yorke, J. A. (1990b). Controlling chaotic dynamical systems.
           In D. K. Campbell (Ed.), Chaos—Soviet-American perspectives on nonlinear science
           (pp. 153–172). New York: AIP.
479   Bibliography



      Ott, E., Sauer, T., & Yorke, J. A. (1994). Coping with chaos. New York: Wiley.
      Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic
          Books.
      Peitgen, H.-O., Jürgens, H., & Saupe, D. (1992). Chaos and fractals. New York: Springer-
           Verlag.
      Penrose, R. (1989). The emperor’s new mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Pickover, C. A. (1991). Computers, pattern, chaos and beauty: Graphics from an unseen
           world. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
      Poincaré, H. (1890). Sur les équations de la dynamique et le problème de trois corps. Acta
          Math., 13: 1–270.
      Póincare, H. (1952). Science and hypothesis. New York: Dover.
      Poundstone, W. (1985). The recursive universe. New York: William Morrow.
      Poundstone, W. (1992). Prisoner’s Dilemma. New York: Doubleday.
      Press, W. H., Flannery, B. P., Teukolsky, S. A., & Vetterling, W. T. (1986). Numerical
           recipes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Prusinkiewicz, P., Lindenmayer, A., Hanan, J. S., et al. (1990). The algorithmic beauty of
           plants. New York: Springer-Verlag.
      Rand, D. A. (1994). Measuring and characterizing spatial patterns, dynamics and chaos
          in spatially extended dynamical systems and cologies. Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A,
          348(1688): 497–514.
      Rand, D. A. & Wilson, H. (1995). Using spatio-temporal chaos and intermediate-scale
          determinism to quantify spatially-extended ecosystems. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B,
          259(1355): 111–117.
      Rapoport, A. & Chammah, A. M. (1965). Prisoner’s Dilemma. Ann Arbor: University of
          Michigan Press.
      Rechenberg, I. (1973). Evolution strategy: Optimization of technical systems by means of
          biological evolution. Stuttgart: Fromman-Holzboog.
      Resnick, M. (1988). LEGO, logo, and life. In C. Langton (Ed.), Artificial life (pp. 397–406).
          Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
      Resnick, M. (1994). Turtles, termites, and traﬃc jams: Explorations in massively parallel
          microworlds. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
      Reynolds, C. W. (1987). Flocks, herds, and schools: A distributed behavioral model.
          Comp. Graph., 21(4): 25–34.
      Ribenboim, P. (1991). The little book of big primes. New York: Springer-Verlag.
      Richardson, L. F. (1961). The problem of contiguity: An appendix of statistics of deadly
          quarrels. General Systems Yearbook, 6: 139–187.
      Ridley, M. (1995). The red queen: Sex and the evolution of human nature. New York:
           Macmillan.
480   Bibliography



      Rosenblatt, F. (1962). Principles of neurodynamics: Perceptrons and the theory of brain
          mechanisms. Washington, D.C.: Spartan Books.
      Rucker, R. (1995). Infinity and the mind: The science and philosophy of the infinite.
          Princeton: Princeton University Press.
      Ruelle, D. (1980). Strange attractors. Math. Intell., 2(3): 126–137.
      Ruelle, D. (1993). Chance and chaos. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
      Ruelle, D. & Takens, F. (1971). On the nature of turbulence. Comm. Math. Phys., 20(3):
           167–192.
      Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1986). Parallel distributive processing.
         Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
      Sarle, W. S. & Net Poohbahs (1994). Kangaroos and training neural networks. FAQ list
           available from ftp://ftp.sas.com/pub/neural/kangaroos.
      Schrödinger, E. (1944). What is life? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Schroeder, M. (1991). Fractals, chaos, power laws. New York: W. H. Freeman.
      Schwefel, H.-P. (1977). Numerische optimierung von computer-modellen mittels der evo-
          lutionsstrategie. Basel: Birkhäuser.
      Shaw, E. (1962). The schooling of fishes. Sci. Am., 206: 128–138.
      Shinbrot, T., Ditto, W., Grebogi, C., Ott, E., Spano, M., & Yorke, J. A. (1992). Using
          the sensitive dependence of chaos (the “butterfly eﬀect”) to direct trajectories in an
          experimental chaotic system. Phys. Rev. Lett., 68(19): 2863–2866.
      Siegelmann, H. T. & Sontag, E. D. (1991). Turing computability with neural networks.
           Appl. Math. Let., 4(6): 77–80.
      Solomonoﬀ, R. J. (1964a). A formal theory of inductive inference: Part I. Info. and
          Control, 7(1): 1–22.
      Solomonoﬀ, R. J. (1964b). A formal theory of inductive inference: Part II. Information
          and Control, 7(1): 224–254.
      Stanley, H. E. & Ostrowsky, N. (Eds.). (1985). On growth and form: Fractal and non
           fractal patterns in physics. Kluwer Academic.
      Sterman, J. D. (1984). Instructions for running the beer distribution game. Technical
          Report D-3679, System Dynamics Group, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
      Sterman, J. D. (1988). Modeling managerial behavior: Misperceptions of feedback in a
          dynamic decision making experiemnt. Management Sci., 35(3): 321–339.
      Stewart, I. (1990). Does God play dice?: The mathematics of chaos. Oxford: Blackwell.
      Stewart, I. (July 1994). Mathematical Recreations: The ultimate anty-particles. Sci. Am.,
          271(1): 104–107.
      Stewart, I. (1995). Nature’s numbers: The unreal reality of mathematical imagination.
          New York: Basic Books.
      Stewart, I. (1996). From here to infinity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
481   Bibliography



      Stinson, D. R. (1995). Cryptography: Theory and practice. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
      Strang, G. (1980). Linear algebra and its applications. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jo-
           vanovich.
      Strogatz, S. (1994). Nonlinear dynamics and chaos. New York: Addison Wesley.
      Tagliarini, G. A. & Page, E. W. (1987). Solving constraint satisfaction problems with neu-
           ral networks. In Proceedings of the first international conference on neural networks,
           San Diego.
      Takens, F. (1980). Detecting strange attractors in turbulence. In D. A. Rand & L. S. Young
          (Eds.), Dynamical systems and turbulence (pp. 366–381). New York: Spinger-Verlag.
      Tank, D. W. & Hopfield, J. J. (December 1987). Collective computation in neuronlike
          circuits. Sci. Am., 257(6): 104–114.
      Toﬀoli, T. (1977). Computation and construction universality of reversible cellular au-
          tomata. J. Comp. Sys. Sci., 15(2): 213–231.
      Toﬀoli, T. (1984). Cellular automata as an alternative to (rather than an approximation
          of) diﬀerential equations in modeling physics. Physica D, 10(1–2): 117–127.
      Toﬀoli, T. & Margolus, N. (1987). Cellular automata machines. London: MIT Press.
      Tomita, K. & Tsuda, I. (1979). Chaos in Belousov-Zhabotinskii reaction in a flow system.
          Phys. Lett. A, 71(5–6): 489.
      Tu, P. N. V. (1992). Dynamical systems: An introduction with applications in economics
           and biology. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
      Turing, A. M. (1936). On computable numbers, with an application to the Entschei-
           dungsproblem. Proc. London Math. Soc., 2(42): 230–265.
      Turing, A. M. (1950). Can a machine think? Mind, 59(236): 433–460.
      Turing, A. M. (1952). The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London,
           B(237): 37–72.
      Turing, A. M. (1963). Computing machinery and intelligence. In E. A. Feigenbaum (Ed.),
           Computers and Thought. New York: McGraw-Hill.
      Ulam, S. M. (1962). On some mathematical problems connected with patterns of growth
          of figures. Proc. Symposia Appl. Math., 14: 215–224.
      Ulam, S. M. & von Neumann, J. (1947). On combinations of stochastic and deterministic
          processes. Bull. Am. Math. Soc., 53: 1120.
      Vanecek, A. & Celikovsky, S. (1996). Control systems: From linear analysis to synthesis
          of chaos. New York: Prentice-Hall.
      von Neumann, J. (1958). The computer and the brain. New Haven: Yale University Press.
      von Neumann, J. (1966). Theory of self-reproducing automata. Urbana: University of
          Illinois Press.
      von Neumann, J. & Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of games and economic behavior.
          Princeton: Princeton University Press.
482   Bibliography



      Waldrop, M. M. (1992). Complexity: The emerging science at the edge of order and chaos.
          New York: Simon & Schuster.
      Wang, H. (1987). Reflections on Kurt Gödel. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
      Wassermann, G. D. (1997). From Occam’s Razor to the roots of consciousness: 20 essays
          on philosophy, philosophy of science and philosophy of mind. Avebury.
      Watson, J. D. (1991). The double helix: A personal account of the discovery of the structure
          of DNA. New York: New American Library.
      Weinberg, R. (1970). Computer simulation of a primitive, evolving eco-system. Technical
          Report 03296-6-T, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
      Werbos, P. (1974). Beyond Regression: New Tools for Prediction and Analysis in the
          Behavioral Sciences. PhD thesis, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass.
      Wesson, R. (1991). Beyond natural selection. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford Books/MIT
          Press.
      Whitehead, A. N. & Russell, B. (1910). Principia mathematica. Cambridge: Cambridge
          University Press.
      Whitehead, S. D. & Lin, L.-J. (1995). Reinforcement learning of a non-Markov decision
          process. Art. Intell., 73(1–2): 271–306.
      Wickler, W. (1968). Mimicry in plants and animals. New York: World University Library.
      Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics, or control and communication in the animal and the
          machine. New York: John Wiley.
      Wills, C. (1989). The wisdom of the genes. New York: Basic Books.
      Wilson, E. O. (1971). The insect societies. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard
          University Press.
      Wilson, E. O. (1975). Sociobiology: The new synthesis. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press
          of Harvard University Press.
      Wilson, S. W. (1994). ZCS: A zeroth level classifier system. Evol. Comp., 2(1): 1–18.
      Wolfram, S. (1983). Statistical mechanics of cellular automata. Rev. Mod. Phys., 55(3):
          601–644.
      Wolfram, S. (1984a). Cellular automata as models of complexity. Nature, 311(4): 419–424.
      Wolfram, S. (1984b). Computation theory of cellular automata. Comm. Math. Phys.,
          96(1): 15–57.
      Wolfram, S. (1984c). Universality and complexity in cellular automata. Physica D, 10(1–2):
          1–35.
      Wolfram, S. (Ed.). (1986). Theory and applications of cellular automata. Singapore: World
          Scientific.
      Wolfram, S. (1994). Cellular automata and complexity. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
      Wolpert, D. H. & Macready, W. G. (1995). No free lunch theorems for search. Technical
          Report SFI-TR-95-02-010, The Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, N.M.
Index




        A                                                  autocatalytic chemical sets, 231, 252,
        activation function, 311, 319, 320, 386,                    417
                    394, 395, 443                          autonomous agents, 261–279, 444
        Adams, Henry Brooks, 181                               alternative definition, 275–276
        adaptation, 3, 4, 8, 182, 339–381,                     boids, 270–275, 328, 331, 445
                    383–413, 415–424, 428–433,                 termites, 262–264, 328
                    443                                        virtual ants, 264–270, 328, 467
              cultural, 362–363, 418–419, 421              Axelrod, Robert, 282, 292–297, 303
                 in animals, 363
              evolution, see evolution                     B
              learning, see learning                       Bacon, Francis, 159
        addition, 35                                       bacteria, 3, 281, 303, 339, 356, 357, 421
        agent, see autonomous agents                       Bak, Per, 328
        algorithmic complexity, see complexity,            Barnsley, Michael F., 93, 98, 103
                    algorithmic                            basis, see linear algebra, basis
        anomaly detection, 410                             bats, 341
        anonymous quotes, 261, 339                         Beatles, The, 312
        ants                                               Beer Game, see dynamical systems,
                                                                      Beer Game
              real, 2–4, 282
                                                           Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction, 252
              virtual, see autonomous agents,
                                                           Bennet, Charles, 135
                    virtual ants
                                                           Berry Paradox, 225
        Aquinas, Thomas, 418
                                                           Biblical references, 23, 261, 281
        arms race, 341, 422, 444                           Bienert, Peter, 355
        Arneodo, A., 187                                   bifurcation, 148–150, 161–162, 189, 212,
        artificial intelligence, 29, 276, 365, 443,                   445
                    444                                    Blake, William, 427
        artificial life, 242, 444                          Blum, Lenore, 55
        Ashby, W. Ross, 307                                Bohr, Niels, 139
        Asimov, Isaac, 327                                 boids, see autonomous agents, boids
        associative memory, 307–309, 312–318,              Boll, David, 125
                    444                                    brains, 77, 383–384
        atom, 31                                           Brown, Jerry, 307
            ∗ Numbers in bold refer to glossary entries.
484   Index



      Brownian motion, see fractals,             Chaitin, Gregory, 130, 225, 423
                Brownian motion                  chaos, 7, 139–201, 203–219, 221–227,
      Bryson, A. E., 393                                     398–400, 428–433, 445, see
      bucket brigade algorithm, 368–370, 379,                also dynamical systems
                445                                    and control, 203–219
           implicit version, 370, 372, 379             bifurcation, see bifurcation
      Buddha, 383                                      characteristics of, 154–156, 203–204
      Bunimovich, Leonid, 269                          collapse in dimensionality, 197–198
      Butler, Samuel, 339                              contraction of phase space, 163
                                                       delayed coordinate embedding,
      C                                                      174–176, 449
      calculus, 165–168                                dynamical systems, see also
            derivative, 448                                  dynamical systems
            diﬀerential equation, 448                  Feigenbaum constant, 149–150,
            diﬀerentiation, 448                              451
            gradient, 206–207, 287, 453                in producer-consumer systems,
            integral, 455                                    182–201
            integration, 455                           in rabbit ventricle tissue, 212
            partial derivative, 206–207,               in weather model, 168–170
                  394–397                              in white cell production, 173
            vectors, 205–207                           long-term prediction, 150–153,
      Cantor, Georg, 19, 48, 62                              163–165, 170
      Cantor set, see fractals, Cantor set       Chomsky hierarchy, see models of
      Carnap, Rudolf, 129                                    computation, Chomsky
      Carroll, Lewis, 353                                    hierarchy
      cellular automata, 231–259, 445            Chomsky, Noam, 83
            and natural phenomena, 251–255       Church, Alonzo, 29, 30
            Class IV CA                          Church-Turing thesis, 30
               universal computation, 240–242,   Churchill, Winston, 29
                  245                            circulatory system, 77
            Conway’s Game of Life, 232,          classical physics, 12, 308
                  245–251, 328                   classifier systems, 355–356, 361–381,
               glider, 248, 250, 452                         417–419, 446
               glider gun, 248, 250, 453               zeroth level, 363, 370–379
               moving objects, 248               coastline length, 68
               periodic objects, 248             coevolution, 341–342, 353, 422, 423, 446
               static objects, 246–248           Cohen, E. G. D., 269, 270
               universal computation, 232,       competition and cooperation
                  245–246, 248–251                     in human aﬀairs, 303
            hodgepodge machine, 252                    in natural systems, 281–282
            one-dimensional, 232–245                   in nature, 298, 303
               Langton’s lambda parameter,             in predator-prey systems, 181–201,
                  242–245, 331                               298, 341–342
               Wolfram’s classes, 236–242, 331         in the Prisoner’s Dilemma, 292–305
            time reversibility, 264–265, 466     complex systems, 8, 231–259, 261–279,
      cellular growth, 79                                    281–305, 307–336, 428–433,
485   Index



                 446, see also dynamical         Darwinism, 340, 448
                 systems, individual-based       Dawkins, Richard, 339, 340, 357
                 ecosystems                      decision problems, 40–42, 448
           autonomous agents, see                decrement function, 35
                 autonomous agents               delayed coordinate embedding, see
           cellular automata, see cellular                  chaos, delayed coordinate
                 automata                                   embedding
           Hopfield networks, see neural         delta rule, see learning, perceptron
                 networks, Hopfield networks                learning algorithm
           iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma, see      density of real number line, 20
                 iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma     diagonalization, 19, 43
      complexity, 446                            diﬀusion limited aggregation, see
           algorithmic, 129–136, 224–225, 443               fractals, diﬀusion limited
           eﬀective, 134–136                                aggregation
           other measures, 134                   digital circuits, 248, 388, 392
           space, 131, 464                       Dijkstra, E. W., 23
           statistical, 132–134                  dilemma, see game theory, dilemmas
           time, 36–40, 131, 466                 Dirac, Paul, 61
      compression, 131, 132, 135, 407, 408,      discrete versus continuous, 55
                 410
                                                 Ditto, William, 212
      computation, 6–7, 23–49, 428–433, 447,
                                                 DNA, 343, 419, 421
                 see also models of
                                                 Dresher, Melvin, 292
                 computation
                                                 dynamical systems, 139–201, 203–219,
           over the reals, 55–56
                                                            308, 449, see also chaos
      computing from queries, 42
                                                      as computing devices, 226
      consistence and completeness of
                                                      basin of attraction, 143, 444
                 mathematics, 51
      contravariant basis, see linear algebra,        Beer Game, 192
                 contravariant basis                  behavior
      control, 363–364, 409, 447, see also               fixed-point, 140, 142–143, 451
                 chaos, control                          limit-cycle or periodic, 140,
      convection, 168                                       143–144, 456, 461
      Conway, John, 245                                  quasiperiodic, 140–141, 462
      Conway’s Game of Life, see cellular                stable versus unstable, 143
                 automata, Conway’s Game of           continuous, 168–170, 183–187
                 Life                                 delay-diﬀerential, 173–176
      Cosnard, Michel, 226                            diﬀerence equation, 448
      cost optimization, 307–309, 318–324,            diﬀerential equation, 448
                 343                                  discrete, 139–158, 187–197,
      Coullet, P., 187                                      203–219, 221–227, see also
      Crutchfield, James, 135                               cellular automata
      cups problem, 376–379                           equilibrium, 450
      cybernetics, 364                                generalized Lotka-Volterra system,
                                                            186–187
      D                                               Hénon map, 159–165, 203–219,
      Darwin, Charles, 282, 339, 342, 358                   400–401, 454
486   Index



           individual-based ecosystems,               in human culture, 357–358
                 187–197                              natural, 339–343
           iterative, 112                        evolutionary programming, 355
           logistic map, 141–153, 222–224,       evolutionary stable strategies, 296–297,
                 399–400, 456                              450
           Lorenz system, 159, 168–170, 456      evolutionary strategies, 355
           Lotka-Volterra system, 183–185,       exclusive-or, 390–393, 398–399, 468
                 187, 190, 192, 194, 197, 198,   expert systems, 364–365, 451
                 456                             exponentiation, 36
           Mackey-Glass system, 159,
                 173–176, 457                    F
           predator-prey systems, 181–201,       Farber, Rob, 404
                 461                             Farmer, Doyne, 369, 417
           stable versus unstable, 213, 464,     feedback neural networks, see neural
                 467                                        networks, feedback
           strange attractors, 159–180, 186,     feedforward neural networks, see neural
                 189, 465                                   networks, feedforward
           tent map, 222–224                     Feigenbaum constant, see chaos,
                                                            Feigenbaum constant
      E                                          Feigenbaum, Mitchell, 149
      echolocation, 341                          Fermat’s last theorem, 120, 242
      economics, 3, 72, 156, 192, 254, 261,      Fisher, Ronald, 339
                287, 292, 303, 361               fixed-point behavior, see dynamical
      ecosystems, 8, 182, 231, 254, 296, 327,               systems, behavior, fixed-point
                357, 449                         flocks and herds, 231, 254, 270, 275
      edge of chaos, 141, 232, 245, 449          Flood, Merrill, 292
      eﬀective complexity, see complexity,       flowering plants, 362
                eﬀective                         Fogel, Lawrence, 355
      eigenvalue, see linear algebra,            formal system, 54, 451
                eigensystems                     Forrest, Stephanie, 360
      eigenvector, see linear algebra,           fractals, 7, 61–76, 428–433, 452
                eigensystems                          aﬃne transformation, 93–111
      Einstein, Albert, 1                             Brownian motion, 72, 74, 75
      emergence, 3, 4, 276, 325, 449                  Cantor set, 62–65, 71, 445
      encoder-decoder, 407                            deterministic, 135, 136
      energy surface, 308, 324, 389                   diﬀusion limited aggregation, 74,
      Epimenides, 51                                        448
      ergodic, 155, 170, 204, 450                     dimension, 67–71, 452
      Euclid, 61                                      fern, 102, 105
      Euclidean geometry, 61, 450                     from growth, 77–78
      Euler’s method, 168, 198, 450                   Iterated Functional Systems (IFS),
      evolution, 3, 4, 282, 339–360, 417–419,               103–105, 454
                450, see also genetic                 Julia sets, 120–125, 455
                algorithms                            Koch curve, 65–66, 71, 455
           coevolution, see coevolution               L-systems, 77–92, 457
           in academia, 356                           Mandelbrot set, 111–127, 457
487   Index



              and π, 125                          generalized Lotka-Volterra system, see
           mountains and streams, 75                         dynamical systems,
           Multiple Reduction Copy Machine                   generalized Lotka-Volterra
                 algorithm, 98–101, 458                      system
           nonlinear, 111–127                     genetic algorithms, 342–354, 356, 361,
           Peano curve, 66–67, 71, 460                       416, 420, 452
           random, 71–75                               basic algorithm, 344
           Sierpinski Gasket, 99                       combinatorial optimization,
           space-filling curves, 67, 464                     350–351, 446
           stochastic, 135, 136                        fitness functions, 343–345
           strange attractors, 162                     function optimization, 348–350
      Fredkin, Edward, 56, 226                         iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma,
      Fuller, R. Buckminster, 129                            351–353
      function approximation, 409, 452, see            schemata and implicit parallelism,
                 also neural networks, function              353–354, 454
                 approximation                         string matching, 343–348
                                                  genetic programming, 355, 452
                                                  geometric interpretation of inner
      G                                                      product, 207
      Gaia hypothesis, 357
                                                  Gerhardt, Martin, 252
      game theory, 452
                                                  Goebel, Randy, 415
           dilemmas, 288–293
                                                  Gödel, Kurt, 25, 51–58
              Chicken, 291–292                    Gödel number, 25, 26, 41, 42, 44, 45,
              Communal Coﬀee, 288–291                        453
              Deadlock, 290, 292                  Gödel’s statement, 52–53, 453
              Prisoner’s Dilemma, 292–293,        Gödel’s theorem, 53
                 461                              Gödelization, 25–26, 41, 453
              requirements for, 288–291           Gould, Stephen J., 356
              Stag Hunt, 291–292                  graph coloring, 333–334
           mixed strategy, 284–287, 458           Grebogi, Celso, 203, 211
           Nash equilibria, 287, 297, 458         Grogono, Peter, 54
           strategy, 282, 283, 465
           zero-sum games, 282–287, 468           H
              cake-slicing, 283–284, 286          Halting Problem, 43–45, 119, 120, 453
              matching-pennies, 283–287           halting set, 44
      Gardner, Martin, 245                        Hamilton, William, 296
      Garfinkel, Alan, 212                        Hardy, G. H., 111
      Garzon, Max, 226                            Hebb, Donald, 313
      gazelles, 4, 341                            Hénon map, see dynamical systems,
      Gell-Mann, Murray, 135                                Hénon map
      gene regulation, 252, 261, 331              Hénon, Michel, 160
      general recursive functions, see models     heredity, 340–343, 358
                 of computation, general          Hilbert, David, 51, 67
                 recursive functions              Hillis, Danny, 422
      generalized delta rule, see learning,       Hinton, G., 393
                 backpropagation                  Ho, Y.-C., 393
488   Index



      hodgepodge machine, see cellular            Kepler, Johannes, 77
                automata, hodgepodge              Knuth, Donald E., 435
                machine                           Koch curve, see fractals, Koch curve
      Hofstadter, Douglas, 203                    Koiran, Pascal, 226
      holism, 3, 430, 454                         Kolmogorov, Andrei, 130
      Holland, John, 342, 353, 354, 356, 361,     Kong, X. P., 269, 270
                366, 368, 370                     Koza, John, 355
      Hopfield, John, 318, 319, 324
      Hopfield networks, see neural networks,     L
                Hopfield networks                 Lamarck, Jean Baptiste, 358
      Huxley, T. H., 231                          Lamarckism, 358, 456
                                                  lambda calculus, see models of
      I                                                      computation, lambda calculus
      immune systems, 369                         Langton, Chris, 242–245, 264, 265, 269,
      incomputability, 42–45                                 270, 275, 328, 331
      increment function, 35                      Lapedes, Alan, 404
      individual-based ecosystems, see            Laplace, Pierre-Simon de, 141
                 dynamical systems,               learning, 3, 4, 456, see also bucket
                 individual-based ecosystems                 brigade algorithm
      infinity                                         backpropagation, 393–400, 404,
            countable, 15, 48, 447                           411, 412, 444
            transfinite numbers, 48                    Hebbian, 312–318, 384, 453
            uncountable, 19, 48, 467                   perceptron learning algorithm,
      Iterated Functional Systems (IFS), see                 388–390, 448
                 fractals, Iterated Functional    Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 165
                 Systems (IFS)                    Lennon, John, 312
      iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma, 293–303,       Lewin, Roger, 361
                 343, 348, 351–353, 361–362,      Liar’s Paradox, 52
                 455                              lichen, 281
            ecological version, 297–301           limit-cycle behavior, see dynamical
            Friedman, 296                                    systems, behavior, limit-cycle
            Joss, 296                                        or periodic
            Pavlov, 299–301, 352                  Lindenmayer, Aristid, 77, 78
            spatial version, 301–303, 328         linear algebra
            Tit-for-Tat, 294–297, 331, 351–353,        basic operations, 94–98
                 359–360, 466                          basis, 210
                                                       contravariant basis, 210
      J                                                determinant, 448
      jokes, xiii, 167, 332                            diagonal matrix, 448
      Julia, Gaston, 121                               dot product, 449
      Julia sets, see fractals, Julia sets             eigensystems, 209–211
                                                       eigenvalue, 449
      K                                                eigenvector, 449
      Kant, Immanuel, 181, 221                         inner product, 455
      Kauﬀman, Stuart, 253, 261, 275,                  matrices, 457
              327–331, 422                             outer product, 460
489   Index



            symmetric matrices, 465                  Post production systems, 364–365,
            transpose, 467                                 461
            vector products, 207–209                 recurrent neural networks, 226, 388
            vectors, 468                             shift maps, 226
      lions, 4, 341                                  Stutter, 30–36, 465
      Lisp, see models of computation, Lisp          Turing machines, 28–29, 83, 226,
      list, 31                                             467
      logical quantifiers, 52                    monotonic function, 19, 458
      logistic map, see dynamical systems,       Moore, Christopher, 226
                 logistic map                    Morgenstern, Oskar, 282
      Lorenz system, see dynamical systems,      moths, 341
                 Lorenz system                   motion, 139
      Lotka, Alfred J., 183                      multicellular organisms, 231, 253, 281,
      Lotka-Volterra system, see dynamical                 357, 421
                 systems, Lotka-Volterra         Multiple Reduction Copy Machine
                 system                                    algorithm, see fractals,
      Lovelock, James, 357                                 Multiple Reduction Copy
      L-systems, see fractals, L-systems                   Machine algorithm
                                                 multiplication, 36
      M                                          multitasking, 46
      Mackey-Glass system, see dynamical
                 systems, Mackey-Glass system    N
      Macready, William, 135, 422                Nash equilibria, see game theory, Nash
      Mandelbrot, Benoit, 61, 68, 93, 115, 122             equilibria
      Mandelbrot set, see fractals,              Nash, John, 287
                 Mandelbrot set                  Nash, Ogden, 261
      McCarthy, John, 31                         neo-Darwinism, 340, 459
      McCulloch, W. S., 310                      neural networks, 309–326, 383–413,
      McCulloch-Pitts networks, see neural                 417–420, 459, see also
                 networks, McCulloch-Pitts                 learning
                 networks                            applications, 409–410
      memes, 357–358, 418, 457, see also             feedback, 309–326, 384, 451
                 adaptation, cultural, and           feedforward, 384, 423, 451
                 evolution, in human culture         function approximation, 398–404
      Mendel, Gregor, 342–343                        Hopfield networks, 318–325, 328,
      Miller, Henry, 139                                   331, 385, 454
      Minsky, Marvin, 276, 383, 391                     k-out-of-n rule, 322–323
      models of computation, 26–30, 458              internal representations, 404–408
           billiard-balls, 56, 226                   McCulloch-Pitts networks,
           Chomsky hierarchy, 83, 445                      310–318, 324–325, 385, 386,
           Conway’s Game of Life, 248–251,                 388
                 447                                 multilayer perceptrons, 392–411,
           equivalence of, 30                              458
           general recursive functions, 27–28           backpropagation, 393–400, 404,
           lambda calculus, 29–30, 456                     411, 412, 444
           Lisp, 30, 355, 456                        perceptrons, 385–392, 461
490   Index



              and linear separability, 390–392,   perceptrons, see neural networks,
                 456                                         perceptrons
           recurrent, 423, 462                    Perelson, Alan, 369
           supervised, 384                        periodic behavior, see dynamical
           universal approximation, 401–404                  systems, behavior, limit-cycle
      Newman, James R., 11                                   or periodic
      Newton, Isaac, 165                          phase transitions, 461
      Newton’s method, 113, 459                        in cellular automata, 236–245
      Nietzsche, Friedrich, 281                        in computation, 332–334
      No Free Lunch theorem, 422–423, 459              in dynamical systems, 140–144,
      Nowak, Martin, 301                                     148–150
      NP-completeness, 332–334, 417, 423,         Philbert’s monstrous nose, 316
                 460                              Phillpots, Eden, 111
      numbers, 11–22                              Pitts, W., 310
           binary, 23, 63, 151, 222–224, 245,     Poincaré, Henri, xiii, 5, 56, 139, 227
                 250, 311, 328, 343, 349, 350,    poker, 283
                 354, 355, 366, 371, 374, 386,    Porter, Cole, 159
                 389, 390, 400, 445               Post production systems, see models of
           complex, 111–114, 446                             computation, Post production
           computable, 22, 46, 224                           systems
           incomputable, 454                      predator-prey systems, see dynamical
           irrational, 16–22, 223, 224, 455                  systems, predator-prey
           natural, 14–15, 458                               systems
           primes, 17, 25, 26, 461                predicate calculus, 52
           rational, 15–16, 223, 224, 462         producer-consumer systems, see chaos,
           real, 462                                         in producer-consumer systems
           subdivision of the reals, 21           production rules, 78
           ternary, 63–64                         program input/output, 23–24
                                                  programming and creativity, 11, 435
      O                                           programs
      Occam’s Razor, 136, 460                          adaptation
      order for free, 253, 262, 275                       gabump, 358–360
      Ott, Edward, 203, 211                               gaipd, 358–360
                                                          gastring, 358–360
      P                                                   gasurf, 358–360
      Packard, Norman, 369                                gatask, 358–360
      Page, Edward, 322                                   mlp, 411–413
      Papert, Seymour, 80, 391                            zcs, 379–380
      Parker, D. B., 393                                  zcscup, 379–380
      pattern classification, 385–391, 460             chaos
      pattern recognition, 409                            bifur1d, 156–158
      pea plants, 342                                     gen1d, 156–158
      peacocks and peahens, 341                           gsw, 198–200
      Peano curve, see fractals, Peano curve              henbif, 176–180
      Peano, Giuseppe, 66                                 hencon, 218
      Penrose, Roger, 53, 54, 56, 57                      henon, 176–180
491   Index



              henwarp, 176–180                  randomness, 132–134, 222–225, 462
              lorenz, 176–180                        fractals, see fractals, random
              lotka, 198–200                         Gaussian distribution, 132–134,
              mg, 176–180                                 355, 452
              phase1d, 156–158                       white noise, 468
              phase1d2, 156–158                 Rapoport, Anatol, 294, 295
              predprey, 198–200                 Rechenberg, Ingo, 355
              rossler, 176–180                  recurrent neural networks, see neural
           complex systems                                networks, recurrent
              assoc, 325–326                    Red Queen phenomenon, 353, 422
              boids, 276–278                    reductionism, 1–2, 276, 430, 462
              ca, 255–258                       Resnick, Mitchel, 262, 263, 275, 328
              eipd, 303–304                     Reynolds, Craig, 271, 272, 275, 276, 328
              hopfield, 325–326                 Richardson, L. F., 181
              hp, 255–258                       Richardson, Lewis, 68
              life, 255–258                     Robert, Axelrod, 360
              sipd, 303–304                     Rogers, David, 415
              termites, 276–278                 Rosenblatt, Frank, 385, 389
              vants, 276–278                    Rosenthal, Stanley, 327
           fractals                             Rozenberg, Grzegorz, 77
              diffuse, 75–76                    Ruelle, David, 155
              ifs, 105–106                      Rumelhart, D., 393
              julia, 125–127                    Russell, Bertrand, 1, 51
              lsys, 81–83
              mandel, 125–127                   S
              mrcm, 105–106                     sampling statistics, 194
           overview, 435–441                    sandpiles, 328, 334–335, see also
      proof, 461                                            self-organized criticality
           examples of, 17, 26, 269             Santayana, George, 361
           Gödel’s theorem, 53                 Schuster, Heike, 252
           incomputability of halting set, 44   Schwefel, Hans-Paul, 355
      proof verification, 52                    search method, 416–421, 463
      Propp, James, 266                         search space, 416–423, 463
      Pynchon, Thomas, 231                      seashells, 254, 255
      Pythagoras, 17                            seeing versus proving truth, 54
                                                self-organization, 261–279, 463
      Q                                               boids, 270–275
      quadratic equation, 160, 161                    termites, 263–264
      quasiperiodic behavior, see dynamical           virtual ants, 267–270
                systems, behavior,              self-organized criticality, 328, 334–335,
                quasiperiodic                               463
                                                self-referential, 52, 54, 423, 429, 463
      R                                         self-similarity, 3, 4, 61–76, 463, see also
      Rand, David, 194                                      fractals
      random Boolean networks, 253, 327–331           economic data, 74
      random walk, 71–72, 132, 462                    in strange attractors, 162
492   Index



      selfish genes, 357                         Sterman, John, 192
      sets, 464                                  Stewart, Ian, 270
            co-recursively enumerable, 46–48,    Strang, Gilbert, 209
                 111, 119, 120, 447              strange attractors, see dynamical
            complex number, 111                            systems, strange attractors
            computable or recursive, 43, 45,     Stutter, see models of computation,
                 47, 48                                    Stutter
            halting set, 453                     Stutter built-in functions, 32
            incomputable or not recursive, 43,   super-organisms, 231, 253, 261, 357
                 45, 47, 48, 454                 Sutton, O. G., 307
            not recursively enumerable, 46–48,   Swift, Jonathan, 61
                 459                             symbiosis, 3, 281, 282
            recursively enumerable, 45, 46,      Symons, Donald, 361
                 111, 119, 120, 462
            subdivision of types, 47             T
      shadowing lemma, 153–154, 464              Tagliarini, Gene, 322
      shark and fish populations, 183            Takens, Floris, 174
      shift maps, see models of computation,     Takens’s embedding theorem, see chaos,
                 shift maps                                 delayed coordinate embedding
      Shub, Mike, 55                             Tank, David, 318, 319, 324
      Siegelmann, Hava, 226                      Taylor expansion, 204–205
      Sierpinski Gasket, see fractals,           tent map, see dynamical systems, tent
                 Sierpinski Gasket                          map
      Sierpinski, Waclaw, 62                     termites, see autonomous agents,
      Sigmund, Karl, 301                                    termites
      signal processing, 409                     Three Body Problem, 56, 226, 466
      simulated annealing, 355, 464              time complexity, see complexity, time
      simulation, xiii–xiv, 5–6, 57, 431, 464    time series, 72, 148, 161, 176, 399, 401,
      slime mold, 281                                       466
      Smale, Steven, 55                          Toﬀoli, Tommaso, 56, 226
      Smith, John Maynard, 297                   transforming coordinates, 94–98
      soap bubbles, 307–309, 322, 324            Traveling Salesman Problem, 332–333
      Society of Mind, 276                       Tresser, C., 187
      soft sensors, 410                          Troubetzkoy, S. E., 269
      Solomonoﬀ, Ray, 130                        Turing, Alan, 28, 29, 43, 51
      Sontag, Eduardo, 226                       Turing machines, see models of
      space complexity, see complexity, space               computation, Turing machines
      space-filling curves, see fractals,        Turk, Greg, 269
                 space-filling curves            turtle graphics, 80–81, 467
      Spano, Mark, 212                           Twain, Mark, 139
      Spinoza, Benedict, 221                     Tzu, Sun, 203
      statistical complexity, see complexity,
                 statistical                     U
      statistical mechanical systems, 251        Ulam, Stanislaw, 232
      Steen, Lynn Arthur, 129                    uncertainty, 429–433
      Steiner minimum trees, 322                     Chaitin’s extension, 225, 423, 431
493   Index



           chaos versus randomness, 222–224     V
           Gödel’s incompleteness, 51–58,      virtual ants, see autonomous agents,
                 424, 431, 453                            virtual ants
           in cellular automata, 240–242        Volterra, Vito, 183
           in chaos, 151–153, 163–165, 170,     von Koch, Helge, 62, 65
                 226                            von Neumann, John, 203, 232, 245, 282,
           in coadaptation, 423–424                       415
           in language, 55                      Vonnegut, Kurt, 327
           in mathematics, 51–58, 227
           in patterns, 404–408, 411            W
           in science, 423–424                  Watson, Lyall, 383
           in spatial scales, 193–198           Watts, Alan, 51
                                                Weiss, James, 212
           in the Mandelbrot set, 118–120,
                                                Werbos, Paul, 393
                 242, 432–433
                                                Whitehead, Alfred North, 11, 51, 221
           in thought, 54
                                                Wiener, Norbert, 364
           in virtual ants, 270
                                                Williams, R., 393
           incompleteness versus
                                                Wilson, Stewart, 363, 370, 371,
                 incomputability, 53–55
                                                          373–376, 378, 379
           incomputability versus chaos,
                                                Wolfram, Stephen, 236, 331
                 226–227
                                                Wolpert, David, 135, 422
           incomputability versus               World War I, 303
                 computability, 56–58
           randomness versus                    X
                 incomputability, 224–225       XOR, see exclusive-or
           Turing’s incomputability, 43–45,
                 424, 432                       Y
      universal approximation, 467, see         Yorke, James, 203, 211
                 neural networks, universal     Yourcenar, Marguerite, 427
                 approximation
      universal computation, 40–42, 226, 232,   Z
                 242, 245, 246, 248–251, 270,   Zeno’s paradox, 12–14, 16
                 467, see also models of        zero-sum games, see game theory,
                 computation                             zero-sum games
Production Notes




        It would have been impossible to write this book without the vast collection of excel-
        lent software used by the author. In fact, this book was produced entirely with free
        software. Production and software development took place over three-plus years on
        a number of Intel-based personal computers running Linus Torvalds’s Linux operat-
        ing system, which had the X window system providing all GUI services. The bulk of
        the user-level commands under Linux were written as part of the GNU project. All
        editing was done with Richard Stallman’s emacs editor. All programs were written
        with Stallman’s gcc compiler. Additionally, Larry Wall’s perl scripting language
        was extensively used for automating boring tasks.
            Line drawings were made with xfig, all edited bit-mapped images were drawn
        with either xpaint or the gimp editor, and all plots were produced with gnuplot. A
        few figures derived from royalty-free clip art collections or royalty-free data sources.
        The book was typeset with LATEX using BibTEX to produce the bibliography and
        makeindex for the index.
            The author gratefully thanks and acknowledges the community of hackers who
        have made such excellent software available for free; without it producing this book
        would have been impossible.
